content/src/content/docs/blog/this-week-in-effect/2025/11/14.mdx, before:

---
pagefind: false
title: This Week in Effect - 2025-11-14
excerpt: Cause & Effect podcast episode with OpenRouter. Building AI applications with Effect & Netlify. Effect Office Hours 8.
date: 2025-11-14
authors:
  - davide_scognamiglio
  - mirela_prifti
  - michael_arnaldi
tags:
  - This Week In Effect
---

import { YouTube } from "@astro-community/astro-embed-youtube"
import Tweet from "astro-tweet"
import TwitchPlayerNonInteractive from "@/components/TwitchPlayerNonInteractive.astro"

Hi Effecters!

Welcome back to This Week In Effect (**TWIE**) - your weekly update of the latest developments in the Effect community and ecosystem.

Effect is a powerful TypeScript library that helps developers build complex, synchronous, and asynchronous programs. One key feature that sets Effect apart is how it leverages structured concurrency to provide features such as async cancellation and safe resource management, making it easier to build robust, scalable, and efficient programs.

To get started, below you’ll find links to our documentation as well as our guide for installing Effect. Enjoy!

- [Effect Documentation](/docs/getting-started/introduction/)
- [Installing Effect](/docs/getting-started/installation/)


**Recent major updates:**

- [Effect 3.19](https://effect.website/blog/releases/effect/319) Release.
- [Effect AI SDK](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/releases/tag/%40effect%2Fai%400.27.0) Release.
- Durable workflows in TypeScript with [`@effect/workflow`](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/blob/main/packages/workflow/README.md) - currently in alpha.
- The [Effect community](https://discord.gg/effect-ts) on Discord reached 5510+ members!

&nbsp;
## Technology

Here are all the technical changes from the past week.

### Effect AI
- [@effect/ai: link to website docs](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/5711) (Documentation Update)

### Effect Cluster
- [Optimize Sharding shard release](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/5716) (Optimization)
- [Re-use resume parent messages for child workflows](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/5719) (Optimization)
- [Support and test against vitess for SqlRunnerStorage](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/5726) (Feature)

### Effect Experimental
- [Add persisted RateLimiter to @effect/experimental](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/5731) (Feature)

### Effect Platform
- [Fix UrlParams.setAll overwrite semantics](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/5728) (Bug Fix)

### Effect SQL
- [Improve pg client error handling](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/5717) (Improvement)
- [PgClient: fix regression on undefined config values](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/5725) (Bug Fix)

### Effect Workflow
- [Add persisted RateLimiter to @effect/experimental](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/5731) (Feature)

&nbsp;

## Cause & Effect Podcast | Episode #6

Inside OpenRouter’s Tech Stack and Use of Effect

Louis Vichy, co-founder of [OpenRouter](https://openrouter.ai/), joins Johannes Schickling and Michael Arnaldi to talk about OpenRouter’s TypeScript stack, their internal tooling powered by Effect, and the engineering challenges of scaling an AI platform processing trillions of tokens weekly.

<YouTube
  id="https://www.youtube.com/embed/AVJIqQi11lM?si=BZYWB8eGD70Vvt0k"
  title="Inside OpenRouter’s Tech Stack and Use of Effect | Louis Vichy | Cause & Effect 6"
/>

Cause & Effect features stories from software engineers and companies that use Effect in production. Each episode explores their journey of adopting Effect, including the learning process, challenges faced, and benefits of integrating Effect into their tech stack.

The Cause & Effect podcast is hosted by Johannes Schickling and available on [YouTube](https://www.youtube.com/@effect-ts), [X(Twitter)](https://x.com/EffectTS_/status/1988255926743093386), and audio platforms like [Spotify](https://open.spotify.com/episode/2E525BrMXFVfXIOGk0QIM9) and [Apple Podcast](https://podcasts.apple.com/it/podcast/inside-openrouters-tech-stack-and-use-of-effect-6/id1781879869?i=1000736256230).

&nbsp;

## Community Highlights

- Maxwell Brown joined Sean C Davis to explore integrating AI into web applications using Effect and [Netlify](https://www.netlify.com).

  <YouTube
  id="https://www.youtube.com/embed/8KmFwsj9gbI?si=ewfcsiSQzIuS7-9-"
  title="Building AI applications with Effect + Netlify"
  />

&nbsp;

- [marimo](https://github.com/marimo-team/marimo), a reactive Python notebook, went all in on Effect for its upcoming [VS Code extension](https://github.com/marimo-team/marimo-lsp/tree/main/extension).

&nbsp;

- Pritam Kadam introduced [cliq](https://kpritam.github.io/cliq), a CLI-based AI coding agent that shows how coding agents actually work, from scratch, using Effect for typed effects & composability.

 <Tweet id="1988282125582520787" />

&nbsp;

- **How to Do Real-Time UI Updates in React (WS vs SSE)** by [Lucas Patron](https://www.youtube.com/@lucas-patron).

  <YouTube
  id="https://www.youtube.com/embed/jdJHt2Mbuac?si=7GoVFxbilimM0YKN"
  title="How to Do Real-Time UI Updates in React (WS vs SSE)"
  />

&nbsp;

- Dillon Mulroy livestreamed four new episodes of [**Building a family recipe app with LiveStore, Effect, and CF Workers**](https://www.twitch.tv/videos/2614670954?filter=archives&sort=time).

&nbsp;

## Effect Content Update

 - The eighth episode of **Effect Office Hours** went live on Wednesday! We will publish an edited version on our YouTube channel soon. In the meantime, you can watch the livestream on X(Twitter) below.
   <Tweet id="1988623057288892895" />

&nbsp;

- **🔥 Office Hours 7: Scheduling, Context, Layers, Dependency Management, Tooling, Workflows...** is now on our YouTube Channel.

<YouTube
  id="https://www.youtube.com/embed/rXqkuu4D7fQ?si=kaX4mAcBN2SUlbeb"
  title="Office Hours 7: Scheduling, Context, Layers, Dependency Management, Tooling, Workflows..."
/>

&nbsp;
## Effect Job Opportunities

More and more companies are adopting Effect in their projects. Here’s a list of companies looking for software engineers with Effect experience:

- **Expand.ai**: [Founding Engineer](https://www.expand.ai/careers/founding-engineer)

- **Platonic Systems**: [Remote Effect Engineers](https://twitter.com/platonicsystems/status/1861470819861311945)

- **Inato**: [Product Engineers / Fullstack Engineers](https://jobs.lever.co/inato/6df2d1e3-ce0a-487b-a930-840759803d44)

- **Medbill.ai**: [Founding Software Engineers (full-stack and backend)](https://www.linkedin.com/posts/codingtom_medbill-ai-activity-7260092522708762624-N7TH)

- **Oneiro Solutions**: Software Engineer - Core Team. [Join Effect Discord](https://discord.com/channels/795981131316985866/796153351372275743) and DM *leighman* for further info.

- **Microsub**: [TS Developer](https://x.com/0xdownshift/status/1880013835878154510)

- **Samsung Food**: [Full Stack Developer](https://whisk.bamboohr.com/careers/110)

- **Margins**: [Product Engineer](https://margins.app/jobs/product-engineer)

- **[Precurion](https://precurion.com/)** looking for a remote‑first Founding Engineer with Effect experience – See the job posting in the `#job-board` channel on [our Discord](https://discord.com/channels/795981131316985866/796153351372275743/1362610725931061258).

- **Vitalize Care** is hiring a full-stack engineer with Effect experience: [Full-Stack Engineer](https://jobs.ashbyhq.com/vitalize/d907ba5f-0f2f-4bb4-931a-1680d6daf81a)

- **Embedded Insurance** is hiring for a [Senior Software Engineering](https://embeddedinsurance.bamboohr.com/careers/23) position.

- **Betalyra**, an AI consulting company from Portugal, is looking for a part-time freelance software engineer (TypeScript/Effect) with AI experience – see the job posting in the `#job-board` channel on [our Discord](https://discord.com/channels/795981131316985866/796153351372275743/1362610725931061258).

- **Software Intelligence Works**: [Senior Full-Stack Engineer](https://remotive.com/remote-jobs/software-dev/senior-full-stack-engineer-2011648)

- **14.ai**: [Founding engineer](https://14.ai/careers)

- **Wander** is hiring [Software Developers](https://ship.wander.com) with experience in Effect.

- **Glide**: [Senior Frontend Product Engineer](https://www.glideapps.com/jobs/frontend-product-engineer)

- **Supermemory**: [Founding Backend / Infrastructure Engineer](https://x.com/i/jobs/1928194391946186862)

- **Ressio**: [Senior full stack Engineer](https://crocus-hardhat-6f7.notion.site/Senior-full-stack-engineer-back-end-leaning-28ce06d15219800eb2bcca558d9f0446)

- **Stealth team** looking for a software engineer with Effect experience – see the job posting in the `#job-board` channel on [our Discord](https://discord.com/channels/795981131316985866/796153351372275743/1362610725931061258).

- **A French-speaking** startup team led by Stephan Le Dorze is looking for a freelancer to join them - [see his LinkedIn post](https://www.linkedin.com/posts/stephaneledorze_recherche-senior-typescript-developer-activity-7384894173604265984-btNb) for more details.

- **Freckle.io** is hiring [Platform Engineers](https://x.com/code_typist/status/1930326662677434561) with experience in Effect.

- **A stealth team** that has already scaled their product to 50K daily active users in the last year, is looking for [Effect Developers](https://x.com/wireless_dev/status/1930314012723687739). DM [wireless](https://x.com/wireless_dev) on X for more info.

- Job opening for [Japanese-speaking developers](https://note.com/luma/n/n679d4dcdb363)

- **VST**: [Senior Full Stack Software Engineer](https://www.linkedin.com/jobs/view/3854111540/)

- **Globe Commerce**: [Founding Product Engineer](https://www.linkedin.com/jobs/view/4264203054)

- **Introw**: [Staff Software Engineer](https://join.com/companies/introw/14395111-staff-software-engineer)

- **Gale**: [SWE Intern - Remote (CAN/US)](https://forms.galevisa.com/r/m6gr7e)

- **Heartbeat**: [Senior Software Engineer](https://jobs.heartbeat.chat/35182) 

- **Superwall**: [Full-stack Mobile Developer](https://x.com/jakemor/status/1972770955500876070)

- **spring.new**, Anthropic's flagship customer, is hiring engineers experienced in Effect. See the job posting in the `#job-board` channel on [our Discord](https://discord.com/channels/795981131316985866/796153351372275743/1405134163287343196).

- **ManageSpace** is looking for a Senior Developer to mentor other developers and migrate to Effect – see the job posting in the `#job-board` channel on [our Discord](https://discord.com/channels/795981131316985866/796153351372275743/1389557459949060098).

- **coteach.ai** is looking for a Software Engineer – see the job posting in the `#job-board` channel on [our Discord](https://discord.com/channels/795981131316985866/796153351372275743/1394724166309253290) and DM *Peter Edmonds* for further info.

- **Small SaaS team** is looking for a part-time Effect Developer to implement Effect in their stack. The job posting is available in the `#job-board` channel on [our Discord](https://discord.com/channels/795981131316985866/796153351372275743/1397684638834491412), DM *jonpage* for further info.

- **PhosPhor** is [hiring engineers](https://phosphor.co/) experienced in Effect. You may also reach out to the Phosphor team on [our Discord](https://discord.com/channels/795981131316985866/796153351372275743/1418407399139578067).

- **Warp** is hiring a [Product Engineer](https://www.joinwarp.com/careers/roles?ashby_jid=655962db-5fbe-40cc-a072-9522295b3cbc)

- **Sellhub** is looking for a Backend Engineer. See the job posting in the `#job-board` channel on [our Discord](https://discord.com/channels/795981131316985866/796153351372275743/1423684096428736652).

_Disclaimer: Please note that these job postings are shared for informational purposes, and we encourage applicants to verify details directly with the hiring companies._


&nbsp;
## Effect Merch Store

The [Effect Merch Store](https://effect.website/merch) offers a selection of Effect-branded items designed for the community. All orders are processed and fully managed through [Printful](https://www.printful.com/).

<Tweet id="1868605126862385238" />


&nbsp;
## Closing Notes

That's all for this week. Thank you for being a vital part of our community. Your feedback is highly valued as we fine-tune this format. Feel free to share your thoughts, and we'll do our best to tailor it to the needs of our community.

_Effect Community Team_

Commit message:

Update excerpt, community member count, add teej stream

content/src/content/docs/blog/this-week-in-effect/2025/11/14.mdx, after:

---
pagefind: false
title: This Week in Effect - 2025-11-14
excerpt: OpenRouter's co-founder, Louis Vichy, on the Cause & Effect podcast. Building AI applications with Effect & Netlify. Effect Office Hours 8.
date: 2025-11-14
authors:
  - davide_scognamiglio
  - mirela_prifti
  - michael_arnaldi
tags:
  - This Week In Effect
---

import { YouTube } from "@astro-community/astro-embed-youtube"
import Tweet from "astro-tweet"
import TwitchPlayerNonInteractive from "@/components/TwitchPlayerNonInteractive.astro"

Hi Effecters!

Welcome back to This Week In Effect (**TWIE**) - your weekly update of the latest developments in the Effect community and ecosystem.

Effect is a powerful TypeScript library that helps developers build complex, synchronous, and asynchronous programs. One key feature that sets Effect apart is how it leverages structured concurrency to provide features such as async cancellation and safe resource management, making it easier to build robust, scalable, and efficient programs.

To get started, below you’ll find links to our documentation as well as our guide for installing Effect. Enjoy!

- [Effect Documentation](/docs/getting-started/introduction/)
- [Installing Effect](/docs/getting-started/installation/)


**Recent major updates:**

- [Effect 3.19](https://effect.website/blog/releases/effect/319) Release.
- [Effect AI SDK](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/releases/tag/%40effect%2Fai%400.27.0) Release.
- Durable workflows in TypeScript with [`@effect/workflow`](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/blob/main/packages/workflow/README.md) - currently in alpha.
- The [Effect community](https://discord.gg/effect-ts) on Discord reached 5570+ members!

&nbsp;
## Technology

Here are all the technical changes from the past week.

### Effect AI
- [@effect/ai: link to website docs](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/5711) (Documentation Update)

### Effect Cluster
- [Optimize Sharding shard release](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/5716) (Optimization)
- [Re-use resume parent messages for child workflows](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/5719) (Optimization)
- [Support and test against vitess for SqlRunnerStorage](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/5726) (Feature)

### Effect Experimental
- [Add persisted RateLimiter to @effect/experimental](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/5731) (Feature)

### Effect Platform
- [Fix UrlParams.setAll overwrite semantics](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/5728) (Bug Fix)

### Effect SQL
- [Improve pg client error handling](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/5717) (Improvement)
- [PgClient: fix regression on undefined config values](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/5725) (Bug Fix)

### Effect Workflow
- [Add persisted RateLimiter to @effect/experimental](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/5731) (Feature)

&nbsp;

## Cause & Effect Podcast | Episode #6

Inside OpenRouter’s Tech Stack and Use of Effect

Louis Vichy, co-founder of [OpenRouter](https://openrouter.ai/), joins Johannes Schickling and Michael Arnaldi to talk about OpenRouter’s TypeScript stack, their internal tooling powered by Effect, and the engineering challenges of scaling an AI platform processing trillions of tokens weekly.

<YouTube
  id="https://www.youtube.com/embed/AVJIqQi11lM?si=BZYWB8eGD70Vvt0k"
  title="Inside OpenRouter’s Tech Stack and Use of Effect | Louis Vichy | Cause & Effect 6"
/>

Cause & Effect features stories from software engineers and companies that use Effect in production. Each episode explores their journey of adopting Effect, including the learning process, challenges faced, and benefits of integrating Effect into their tech stack.

The Cause & Effect podcast is hosted by Johannes Schickling and available on [YouTube](https://www.youtube.com/@effect-ts), [X(Twitter)](https://x.com/EffectTS_/status/1988255926743093386), and audio platforms like [Spotify](https://open.spotify.com/episode/2E525BrMXFVfXIOGk0QIM9) and [Apple Podcast](https://podcasts.apple.com/it/podcast/inside-openrouters-tech-stack-and-use-of-effect-6/id1781879869?i=1000736256230).

&nbsp;

## Community Highlights

- Maxwell Brown joined Sean C Davis to talk about building AI web applications using Effect and Netlify.

  <YouTube
  id="https://www.youtube.com/embed/8KmFwsj9gbI?si=ewfcsiSQzIuS7-9-"
  title="Building AI applications with Effect + Netlify"
  />

&nbsp;

- Pritam Kadam introduced [cliq](https://kpritam.github.io/cliq), a CLI-based AI coding agent that shows how coding agents actually work, from scratch, using Effect for typed effects & composability.

 <Tweet id="1988282125582520787" />

&nbsp;

- [marimo](https://github.com/marimo-team/marimo), a reactive Python notebook, went all in on Effect for its upcoming VS Code extension.

&nbsp;

- **How to Do Real-Time UI Updates in React (WS vs SSE)** by [Lucas Patron](https://www.youtube.com/@lucas-patron).

  <YouTube
  id="https://www.youtube.com/embed/jdJHt2Mbuac?si=7GoVFxbilimM0YKN"
  title="How to Do Real-Time UI Updates in React (WS vs SSE)"
  />

&nbsp;

- Dillon Mulroy livestreamed four new episodes of [**Building a family recipe app with LiveStore, Effect, and CF Workers**](https://www.twitch.tv/videos/2614670954?filter=archives&sort=time).

&nbsp;

- Another coding session by teej dv as he works on [rebuilding terminal.shop using Effect](https://x.com/teej_dv/status/1988271005299605832?s=20).

&nbsp;

## Effect Content Update

 - The eighth episode of **Effect Office Hours** went live on Wednesday! We will publish an edited version on our YouTube channel soon. In the meantime, you can watch the livestream on X(Twitter) below.
   <Tweet id="1988623057288892895" />

&nbsp;

- **🔥 Office Hours 7: Scheduling, Context, Layers, Dependency Management, Tooling, Workflows...** is now on our YouTube Channel.

<YouTube
  id="https://www.youtube.com/embed/rXqkuu4D7fQ?si=kaX4mAcBN2SUlbeb"
  title="Office Hours 7: Scheduling, Context, Layers, Dependency Management, Tooling, Workflows..."
/>

&nbsp;
## Effect Job Opportunities

More and more companies are adopting Effect in their projects. Here’s a list of companies looking for software engineers with Effect experience:

- **Expand.ai**: [Founding Engineer](https://www.expand.ai/careers/founding-engineer)

- **Platonic Systems**: [Remote Effect Engineers](https://twitter.com/platonicsystems/status/1861470819861311945)

- **Inato**: [Product Engineers / Fullstack Engineers](https://jobs.lever.co/inato/6df2d1e3-ce0a-487b-a930-840759803d44)

- **Medbill.ai**: [Founding Software Engineers (full-stack and backend)](https://www.linkedin.com/posts/codingtom_medbill-ai-activity-7260092522708762624-N7TH)

- **Oneiro Solutions**: Software Engineer - Core Team. [Join Effect Discord](https://discord.com/channels/795981131316985866/796153351372275743) and DM *leighman* for further info.

- **Microsub**: [TS Developer](https://x.com/0xdownshift/status/1880013835878154510)

- **Samsung Food**: [Full Stack Developer](https://whisk.bamboohr.com/careers/110)

- **Margins**: [Product Engineer](https://margins.app/jobs/product-engineer)

- **[Precurion](https://precurion.com/)** looking for a remote‑first Founding Engineer with Effect experience – See the job posting in the `#job-board` channel on [our Discord](https://discord.com/channels/795981131316985866/796153351372275743/1362610725931061258).

- **Vitalize Care** is hiring a full-stack engineer with Effect experience: [Full-Stack Engineer](https://jobs.ashbyhq.com/vitalize/d907ba5f-0f2f-4bb4-931a-1680d6daf81a)

- **Embedded Insurance** is hiring for a [Senior Software Engineering](https://embeddedinsurance.bamboohr.com/careers/23) position.

- **Betalyra**, an AI consulting company from Portugal, is looking for a part-time freelance software engineer (TypeScript/Effect) with AI experience – see the job posting in the `#job-board` channel on [our Discord](https://discord.com/channels/795981131316985866/796153351372275743/1362610725931061258).

- **Software Intelligence Works**: [Senior Full-Stack Engineer](https://remotive.com/remote-jobs/software-dev/senior-full-stack-engineer-2011648)

- **14.ai**: [Founding engineer](https://14.ai/careers)

- **Wander** is hiring [Software Developers](https://ship.wander.com) with experience in Effect.

- **Glide**: [Senior Frontend Product Engineer](https://www.glideapps.com/jobs/frontend-product-engineer)

- **Supermemory**: [Founding Backend / Infrastructure Engineer](https://x.com/i/jobs/1928194391946186862)

- **Ressio**: [Senior full stack Engineer](https://crocus-hardhat-6f7.notion.site/Senior-full-stack-engineer-back-end-leaning-28ce06d15219800eb2bcca558d9f0446)

- **Stealth team** looking for a software engineer with Effect experience – see the job posting in the `#job-board` channel on [our Discord](https://discord.com/channels/795981131316985866/796153351372275743/1362610725931061258).

- **A French-speaking** startup team led by Stephan Le Dorze is looking for a freelancer to join them - [see his LinkedIn post](https://www.linkedin.com/posts/stephaneledorze_recherche-senior-typescript-developer-activity-7384894173604265984-btNb) for more details.

- **Freckle.io** is hiring [Platform Engineers](https://x.com/code_typist/status/1930326662677434561) with experience in Effect.

- **A stealth team** that has already scaled their product to 50K daily active users in the last year, is looking for [Effect Developers](https://x.com/wireless_dev/status/1930314012723687739). DM [wireless](https://x.com/wireless_dev) on X for more info.

- Job opening for [Japanese-speaking developers](https://note.com/luma/n/n679d4dcdb363)

- **VST**: [Senior Full Stack Software Engineer](https://www.linkedin.com/jobs/view/3854111540/)

- **Globe Commerce**: [Founding Product Engineer](https://www.linkedin.com/jobs/view/4264203054)

- **Introw**: [Staff Software Engineer](https://join.com/companies/introw/14395111-staff-software-engineer)

- **Gale**: [SWE Intern - Remote (CAN/US)](https://forms.galevisa.com/r/m6gr7e)

- **Heartbeat**: [Senior Software Engineer](https://jobs.heartbeat.chat/35182) 

- **Superwall**: [Full-stack Mobile Developer](https://x.com/jakemor/status/1972770955500876070)

- **spring.new**, Anthropic's flagship customer, is hiring engineers experienced in Effect. See the job posting in the `#job-board` channel on [our Discord](https://discord.com/channels/795981131316985866/796153351372275743/1405134163287343196).

- **ManageSpace** is looking for a Senior Developer to mentor other developers and migrate to Effect – see the job posting in the `#job-board` channel on [our Discord](https://discord.com/channels/795981131316985866/796153351372275743/1389557459949060098).

- **coteach.ai** is looking for a Software Engineer – see the job posting in the `#job-board` channel on [our Discord](https://discord.com/channels/795981131316985866/796153351372275743/1394724166309253290) and DM *Peter Edmonds* for further info.

- **Small SaaS team** is looking for a part-time Effect Developer to implement Effect in their stack. The job posting is available in the `#job-board` channel on [our Discord](https://discord.com/channels/795981131316985866/796153351372275743/1397684638834491412), DM *jonpage* for further info.

- **PhosPhor** is [hiring engineers](https://phosphor.co/) experienced in Effect. You may also reach out to the Phosphor team on [our Discord](https://discord.com/channels/795981131316985866/796153351372275743/1418407399139578067).

- **Warp** is hiring a [Product Engineer](https://www.joinwarp.com/careers/roles?ashby_jid=655962db-5fbe-40cc-a072-9522295b3cbc)

- **Sellhub** is looking for a Backend Engineer. See the job posting in the `#job-board` channel on [our Discord](https://discord.com/channels/795981131316985866/796153351372275743/1423684096428736652).

_Disclaimer: Please note that these job postings are shared for informational purposes, and we encourage applicants to verify details directly with the hiring companies._


&nbsp;
## Effect Merch Store

The [Effect Merch Store](https://effect.website/merch) offers a selection of Effect-branded items designed for the community. All orders are processed and fully managed through [Printful](https://www.printful.com/).

<Tweet id="1868605126862385238" />


&nbsp;
## Closing Notes

That's all for this week. Thank you for being a vital part of our community. Your feedback is highly valued as we fine-tune this format. Feel free to share your thoughts, and we'll do our best to tailor it to the needs of our community.

_Effect Community Team_
