content/src/content/docs/blog/this-week-in-effect/2025/11/28.mdx, before:

---
pagefind: false
title: This Week in Effect - 2025-11-28
excerpt: Effect Solutions and doctor-effect by Kit Langton. Office Hours and ChEffect coding session.
date: 2025-11-28
authors:
  - davide_scognamiglio
  - mirela_prifti
  - michael_arnaldi
tags:
  - This Week In Effect
---

import { YouTube } from "@astro-community/astro-embed-youtube"
import Tweet from "astro-tweet"
import TwitchPlayerNonInteractive from "@/components/TwitchPlayerNonInteractive.astro"

Hi Effecters!

Welcome back to This Week In Effect (**TWIE**) - your weekly update of the latest developments in the Effect community and ecosystem.

Effect is a powerful TypeScript library that helps developers build complex, synchronous, and asynchronous programs. One key feature that sets Effect apart is how it leverages structured concurrency to provide features such as async cancellation and safe resource management, making it easier to build robust, scalable, and efficient programs.

To get started, below you’ll find links to our documentation as well as our guide for installing Effect. Enjoy!

- [Effect Documentation](/docs/getting-started/introduction/)
- [Installing Effect](/docs/getting-started/installation/)


**Recent major updates:**

- [Effect 3.19](https://effect.website/blog/releases/effect/319) Release.
- [Effect AI SDK](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/releases/tag/%40effect%2Fai%400.27.0) Release.
- Durable workflows in TypeScript with [`@effect/workflow`](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/blob/main/packages/workflow/README.md) - currently in alpha.
- The [Effect community](https://discord.gg/effect-ts) on Discord reached 5660+ members!

&nbsp;

## Technology

Here are all the technical changes from the past week.

### Effect Core
- [Fix SqlPersistedQueue batch size](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/5813) (Bug Fix)
- [Fix:Arr.intersectionWith,differenceWith that Iterable](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/5815) (Bug Fix)

### Effect AI
- [Ensure new system prompt is created if none exists when appending / prepending](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/5803) (Bug Fix)

### Effect Cluster
- [Immediately set entity keep alive in EntityResource](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/5785) (Bug Fix)
- [Allow advisory locks to be disabled](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/5793) (Bug Fix)
- [Add TestRunner & SingleRunner modules](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/5827) (Feature)

### Effect Experimental
- [Persisted queue](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/5808) (Feature)
- [Add dynamic batch size to PersistedQueue based on pending takers](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/5816) (Feature)
- [Ensure redis PersistedQueue removes stale pending items on reset](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/5820) (Bug Fix)
- [Reset redis staging area on a schedule for PersistedQueue](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/5829) (Bug Fix)

### Effect Platform
- [Use original status code if headers have already been sent](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/5797) (Bug Fix)
- [Support HttpApiError unification](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/5818) (Feature, Bug Fix)

### Effect SQL
- [Persisted queue](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/5808) (Feature)
- [Fix SqlPersistedQueue batch size](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/5813) (Bug Fix)
- [Add dynamic batch size to PersistedQueue based on pending takers](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/5816) (Feature)
- [Ensure redis PersistedQueue removes stale pending items on reset](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/5820) (Bug Fix)
- [Improve ordering guarantees for SqlPersistedQueue](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/5824) (Improvement)

### Effect Workflow
- [Add DurableQueue module](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/5821) (Feature)
- [Propagate tracing info with DurableQueue](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/5823) (Improvement)
- [Add TestRunner & SingleRunner modules](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/5827) (Feature)

### General Chore
- [Setup trusted publishing to NPM](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/5802) (Optimization)

&nbsp;

## Community Highlights

- Effect mentioned by teej in the special Thanksgiving livestream by ThePrimeagen. Watch from 1:17:12.
  <Tweet id="1993736016293974245" />

&nbsp;

- [Effect Solutions](https://www.effect.solutions), a high-level guide for writing idiomatic Effect programs by Kit Langton.
  <Tweet id="1992956545345441823" />

&nbsp;

- `doctor-effect` by Kit!
  <Tweet id="1994078236716720315" />

&nbsp;

- [monorepo-library-generator](https://github.com/samuelho-dev/monorepo-library-generator) - an Effect-based monorepo library generator with workspace-agnostic architecture. Project by [Samuel Ho](https://github.com/samuelho-dev)

&nbsp;

- [effect-cli-tui](https://github.com/PaulJPhilp/effect-cli-tui) by Paul Philp - an Effect-native CLI wrapper with interactive prompts and display utilities for building powerful terminal user interfaces, has been updated to the 2.0.0 version!

&nbsp;

- Amin Khansari started a blog series about [domain modeling using Effect](https://akhansari.tech/series/designing-with-types-typescript-effect-approach).

&nbsp;

- Dillon Mulroy livestreamed two new episodes of [**Building effect-cloudflare, Effect TS native bindings for CF 🚀**](https://www.twitch.tv/videos/2626810235?filter=archives&sort=time).

&nbsp;
## Effect Content Update

- **Office Hours 9: Effect Solutions, Tooling, AI and LLM uses** and **ChEffect - Part 8: A Local-First App built w/ Effect & LiveStore** are now on our YouTube Channel.

<YouTube
  id="https://www.youtube.com/embed/LYrWA9_qas4?si=Uz8Nas-VIev9oFTc"
  title="Office Hours 9: Effect Solutions, Tooling, AI and LLM use"
/>

&nbsp;

<YouTube
  id="https://www.youtube.com/embed/glf1Bm5DYc8?si=eb-TIPxpC2xoYyLY"
  title="ChEffect - Part 8: A Local-First App built w/ Effect & LiveStore"
/>


&nbsp;

## Cause & Effect Podcast

Don't forget to listen to our **Cause & Effect** podcast hosted by Johannes Schickling and available on [YouTube](https://www.youtube.com/@effect-ts), [X(Twitter)](https://x.com/EffectTS_/status/1988255926743093386), and audio platforms like [Spotify](https://open.spotify.com/episode/2E525BrMXFVfXIOGk0QIM9) and [Apple Podcast](https://podcasts.apple.com/it/podcast/inside-openrouters-tech-stack-and-use-of-effect-6/id1781879869?i=1000736256230).

This podcast highlights stories from software engineers and companies using Effect in production. Each episode explores their journey of adopting Effect, including the learning process, challenges faced, and the benefits of integrating Effect into their tech stack.

We've published our sixth episode with Louis Vichy, co-founder of [OpenRouter](https://openrouter.ai/), who joined Johannes Schickling and Michael Arnaldi to talk about OpenRouter’s TypeScript stack, their internal tooling powered by Effect, and the engineering challenges of scaling an AI platform processing trillions of tokens weekly.

<YouTube
  id="https://www.youtube.com/embed/AVJIqQi11lM?si=BZYWB8eGD70Vvt0k"
  title="Inside OpenRouter’s Tech Stack and Use of Effect | Louis Vichy | Cause & Effect 6"
/>

&nbsp;
## Effect Job Opportunities

More and more companies are adopting Effect in their projects. Here’s a list of companies looking for software engineers with Effect experience:

- **Expand.ai**: [Founding Engineer](https://www.expand.ai/careers/founding-engineer)

- **Platonic Systems**: [Remote Effect Engineers](https://twitter.com/platonicsystems/status/1861470819861311945)

- **Inato**: [Product Engineers / Fullstack Engineers](https://jobs.lever.co/inato/6df2d1e3-ce0a-487b-a930-840759803d44)

- **Medbill.ai**: [Founding Software Engineers (full-stack and backend)](https://www.linkedin.com/posts/codingtom_medbill-ai-activity-7260092522708762624-N7TH)

- **Oneiro Solutions**: Software Engineer - Core Team. [Join Effect Discord](https://discord.com/channels/795981131316985866/796153351372275743) and DM *leighman* for further info.

- **Microsub**: [TS Developer](https://x.com/0xdownshift/status/1880013835878154510)

- **Samsung Food**: [Full Stack Developer](https://whisk.bamboohr.com/careers/110)

- **Margins**: [Product Engineer](https://margins.app/jobs/product-engineer)

- **[Precurion](https://precurion.com/)** looking for a remote‑first Founding Engineer with Effect experience – See the job posting in the `#job-board` channel on [our Discord](https://discord.com/channels/795981131316985866/796153351372275743/1362610725931061258).

- **Vitalize Care** is hiring a full-stack engineer with Effect experience: [Full-Stack Engineer](https://jobs.ashbyhq.com/vitalize/d907ba5f-0f2f-4bb4-931a-1680d6daf81a)

- **Embedded Insurance** is hiring for a [Senior Software Engineering](https://embeddedinsurance.bamboohr.com/careers/23) position.

- **Betalyra**, an AI consulting company from Portugal, is looking for a part-time freelance software engineer (TypeScript/Effect) with AI experience – see the job posting in the `#job-board` channel on [our Discord](https://discord.com/channels/795981131316985866/796153351372275743/1362610725931061258).

- **Software Intelligence Works**: [Senior Full-Stack Engineer](https://remotive.com/remote-jobs/software-dev/senior-full-stack-engineer-2011648)

- **14.ai**: [Founding engineer](https://14.ai/careers)

- **Wander** is hiring [Software Developers](https://ship.wander.com) with experience in Effect.

- **Glide**: [Senior Frontend Product Engineer](https://www.glideapps.com/jobs/frontend-product-engineer)

- **Supermemory**: [Founding Backend / Infrastructure Engineer](https://x.com/i/jobs/1928194391946186862)

- **Ressio**: [Senior full stack Engineer](https://crocus-hardhat-6f7.notion.site/Senior-full-stack-engineer-back-end-leaning-28ce06d15219800eb2bcca558d9f0446)

- **Stealth team** looking for a software engineer with Effect experience – see the job posting in the `#job-board` channel on [our Discord](https://discord.com/channels/795981131316985866/796153351372275743/1362610725931061258).

- **A French-speaking** startup team led by Stephan Le Dorze is looking for a freelancer to join them - [see his LinkedIn post](https://www.linkedin.com/posts/stephaneledorze_recherche-senior-typescript-developer-activity-7384894173604265984-btNb) for more details.

- **Freckle.io** is hiring [Platform Engineers](https://x.com/code_typist/status/1930326662677434561) with experience in Effect.

- **A stealth team** that has already scaled their product to 50K daily active users in the last year, is looking for [Effect Developers](https://x.com/wireless_dev/status/1930314012723687739). DM [wireless](https://x.com/wireless_dev) on X for more info.

- Job opening for [Japanese-speaking developers](https://note.com/luma/n/n679d4dcdb363)

- **VST**: [Senior Full Stack Software Engineer](https://www.linkedin.com/jobs/view/3854111540/)

- **Globe Commerce**: [Founding Product Engineer](https://www.linkedin.com/jobs/view/4264203054)

- **Introw**: [Staff Software Engineer](https://join.com/companies/introw/14395111-staff-software-engineer)

- **Gale**: [SWE Intern - Remote (CAN/US)](https://forms.galevisa.com/r/m6gr7e)

- **Heartbeat**: [Senior Software Engineer](https://jobs.heartbeat.chat/35182) 

- **Superwall**: [Full-stack Mobile Developer](https://x.com/jakemor/status/1972770955500876070)

- **Tranched**: [Full-stack Engineer Web3](https://tranched.fi/careers/fullstack-developer-web3)

- **spring.new**, Anthropic's flagship customer, is hiring engineers experienced in Effect. See the job posting in the `#job-board` channel on [our Discord](https://discord.com/channels/795981131316985866/796153351372275743/1405134163287343196).

- **ManageSpace** is looking for a Senior Developer to mentor other developers and migrate to Effect – see the job posting in the `#job-board` channel on [our Discord](https://discord.com/channels/795981131316985866/796153351372275743/1389557459949060098).

- **coteach.ai** is looking for a Software Engineer – see the job posting in the `#job-board` channel on [our Discord](https://discord.com/channels/795981131316985866/796153351372275743/1394724166309253290) and DM *Peter Edmonds* for further info.

- **Small SaaS team** is looking for a part-time Effect Developer to implement Effect in their stack. The job posting is available in the `#job-board` channel on [our Discord](https://discord.com/channels/795981131316985866/796153351372275743/1397684638834491412), DM *jonpage* for further info.

- **PhosPhor** is [hiring engineers](https://phosphor.co/) experienced in Effect. You may also reach out to the Phosphor team on [our Discord](https://discord.com/channels/795981131316985866/796153351372275743/1418407399139578067).

- **Warp** is hiring a [Product Engineer](https://www.joinwarp.com/careers/roles?ashby_jid=655962db-5fbe-40cc-a072-9522295b3cbc)

- **Sellhub** is looking for a Backend Engineer. See the job posting in the `#job-board` channel on [our Discord](https://discord.com/channels/795981131316985866/796153351372275743/1423684096428736652).

- **Goblins** is looking for a Product Founding Engineer. See the job posting in the `#job-board` channel on [our Discord](https://discord.com/channels/795981131316985866/796153351372275743/1439740311277404231).

_Disclaimer: Please note that these job postings are shared for informational purposes, and we encourage applicants to verify details directly with the hiring companies._


&nbsp;
## Effect Merch Store

The [Effect Merch Store](https://effect.website/merch) offers a selection of Effect-branded items designed for the community. All orders are processed and fully managed through [Printful](https://www.printful.com/).

<Tweet id="1868605126862385238" />


&nbsp;
## Closing Notes

That's all for this week. Thank you for being a vital part of our community. Your feedback is highly valued as we fine-tune this format. Feel free to share your thoughts, and we'll do our best to tailor it to the needs of our community.

_Effect Community Team_

Commit message:

Revise blog post for November 28, 2025
Updated the excerpt to include 'ChEffect 8 coding sessions' and added a section for community events with details on upcoming meetups and a calendar link.

content/src/content/docs/blog/this-week-in-effect/2025/11/28.mdx, after:

---
pagefind: false
title: This Week in Effect - 2025-11-28
excerpt: Effect Solutions and doctor-effect by Kit Langton. Office Hours and ChEffect 8 coding sessions.
date: 2025-11-28
authors:
  - davide_scognamiglio
  - mirela_prifti
  - michael_arnaldi
tags:
  - This Week In Effect
---

import { YouTube } from "@astro-community/astro-embed-youtube"
import Tweet from "astro-tweet"
import TwitchPlayerNonInteractive from "@/components/TwitchPlayerNonInteractive.astro"

Hi Effecters!

Welcome back to This Week In Effect (**TWIE**) - your weekly update of the latest developments in the Effect community and ecosystem.

Effect is a powerful TypeScript library that helps developers build complex, synchronous, and asynchronous programs. One key feature that sets Effect apart is how it leverages structured concurrency to provide features such as async cancellation and safe resource management, making it easier to build robust, scalable, and efficient programs.

To get started, below you’ll find links to our documentation as well as our guide for installing Effect. Enjoy!

- [Effect Documentation](/docs/getting-started/introduction/)
- [Installing Effect](/docs/getting-started/installation/)


**Recent major updates:**

- [Effect 3.19](https://effect.website/blog/releases/effect/319) Release.
- [Effect AI SDK](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/releases/tag/%40effect%2Fai%400.27.0) Release.
- Durable workflows in TypeScript with [`@effect/workflow`](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/blob/main/packages/workflow/README.md) - currently in alpha.
- The [Effect community](https://discord.gg/effect-ts) on Discord reached 5660+ members!

&nbsp;

## Technology

Here are all the technical changes from the past week.

### Effect Core
- [Fix SqlPersistedQueue batch size](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/5813) (Bug Fix)
- [Fix:Arr.intersectionWith,differenceWith that Iterable](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/5815) (Bug Fix)

### Effect AI
- [Ensure new system prompt is created if none exists when appending / prepending](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/5803) (Bug Fix)

### Effect Cluster
- [Immediately set entity keep alive in EntityResource](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/5785) (Bug Fix)
- [Allow advisory locks to be disabled](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/5793) (Bug Fix)
- [Add TestRunner & SingleRunner modules](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/5827) (Feature)

### Effect Experimental
- [Persisted queue](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/5808) (Feature)
- [Add dynamic batch size to PersistedQueue based on pending takers](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/5816) (Feature)
- [Ensure redis PersistedQueue removes stale pending items on reset](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/5820) (Bug Fix)
- [Reset redis staging area on a schedule for PersistedQueue](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/5829) (Bug Fix)

### Effect Platform
- [Use original status code if headers have already been sent](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/5797) (Bug Fix)
- [Support HttpApiError unification](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/5818) (Feature, Bug Fix)

### Effect SQL
- [Persisted queue](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/5808) (Feature)
- [Fix SqlPersistedQueue batch size](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/5813) (Bug Fix)
- [Add dynamic batch size to PersistedQueue based on pending takers](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/5816) (Feature)
- [Ensure redis PersistedQueue removes stale pending items on reset](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/5820) (Bug Fix)
- [Improve ordering guarantees for SqlPersistedQueue](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/5824) (Improvement)

### Effect Workflow
- [Add DurableQueue module](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/5821) (Feature)
- [Propagate tracing info with DurableQueue](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/5823) (Improvement)
- [Add TestRunner & SingleRunner modules](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/5827) (Feature)

### General Chore
- [Setup trusted publishing to NPM](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/5802) (Optimization)

&nbsp;

## Community Events

November has been full of community events, from our weekly Office Hours to local meetups in NYC, Berlin, Hamburg, and Sondrio.

Next up is [Effect Vienna 🇦🇹](https://luma.com/rc84shks) on December 18, organized by Sebastian Lorenz.

To stay informed about future events, visit our [Effect Community Events calendar](https://luma.com/effect-community) and subscribe for updates.

&nbsp;

## Community Highlights

- Effect mentioned by teej in the special Thanksgiving livestream by ThePrimeagen. Watch from 1:17:12.
  <Tweet id="1993736016293974245" />

&nbsp;

- [Effect Solutions](https://www.effect.solutions), a high-level guide for writing idiomatic Effect programs by Kit Langton.
  <Tweet id="1992956545345441823" />

&nbsp;

- `doctor-effect` by Kit!
  <Tweet id="1994078236716720315" />

&nbsp;

- [monorepo-library-generator](https://github.com/samuelho-dev/monorepo-library-generator) - an Effect-based monorepo library generator with workspace-agnostic architecture. Project by [Samuel Ho](https://github.com/samuelho-dev)

&nbsp;

- [effect-cli-tui](https://github.com/PaulJPhilp/effect-cli-tui) by Paul Philp - an Effect-native CLI wrapper with interactive prompts and display utilities for building powerful terminal user interfaces, has been updated to the 2.0.0 version!

&nbsp;

- Amin Khansari started a blog series about [domain modeling using Effect](https://akhansari.tech/series/designing-with-types-typescript-effect-approach).

&nbsp;

- Dillon Mulroy livestreamed two new episodes of [**Building effect-cloudflare, Effect TS native bindings for CF 🚀**](https://www.twitch.tv/videos/2626810235?filter=archives&sort=time).

&nbsp;
## Effect Content Update

- **Office Hours 9: Effect Solutions, Tooling, AI and LLM uses** and **ChEffect - Part 8: A Local-First App built w/ Effect & LiveStore** are now on our YouTube Channel.

<YouTube
  id="https://www.youtube.com/embed/LYrWA9_qas4?si=Uz8Nas-VIev9oFTc"
  title="Office Hours 9: Effect Solutions, Tooling, AI and LLM use"
/>

&nbsp;

<YouTube
  id="https://www.youtube.com/embed/glf1Bm5DYc8?si=eb-TIPxpC2xoYyLY"
  title="ChEffect - Part 8: A Local-First App built w/ Effect & LiveStore"
/>


&nbsp;

## Cause & Effect Podcast

Don't forget to listen to our **Cause & Effect** podcast hosted by Johannes Schickling and available on [YouTube](https://www.youtube.com/@effect-ts), [X(Twitter)](https://x.com/EffectTS_/status/1988255926743093386), and audio platforms like [Spotify](https://open.spotify.com/episode/2E525BrMXFVfXIOGk0QIM9) and [Apple Podcast](https://podcasts.apple.com/it/podcast/inside-openrouters-tech-stack-and-use-of-effect-6/id1781879869?i=1000736256230).

This podcast highlights stories from software engineers and companies using Effect in production. Each episode explores their journey of adopting Effect, including the learning process, challenges faced, and the benefits of integrating Effect into their tech stack.

We've published our sixth episode with Louis Vichy, co-founder of [OpenRouter](https://openrouter.ai/), who joined Johannes Schickling and Michael Arnaldi to talk about OpenRouter’s TypeScript stack, their internal tooling powered by Effect, and the engineering challenges of scaling an AI platform processing trillions of tokens weekly.

<YouTube
  id="https://www.youtube.com/embed/AVJIqQi11lM?si=BZYWB8eGD70Vvt0k"
  title="Inside OpenRouter’s Tech Stack and Use of Effect | Louis Vichy | Cause & Effect 6"
/>

&nbsp;
## Effect Job Opportunities

More and more companies are adopting Effect in their projects. Here’s a list of companies looking for software engineers with Effect experience:

- **Expand.ai**: [Founding Engineer](https://www.expand.ai/careers/founding-engineer)

- **Platonic Systems**: [Remote Effect Engineers](https://twitter.com/platonicsystems/status/1861470819861311945)

- **Inato**: [Product Engineers / Fullstack Engineers](https://jobs.lever.co/inato/6df2d1e3-ce0a-487b-a930-840759803d44)

- **Medbill.ai**: [Founding Software Engineers (full-stack and backend)](https://www.linkedin.com/posts/codingtom_medbill-ai-activity-7260092522708762624-N7TH)

- **Oneiro Solutions**: Software Engineer - Core Team. [Join Effect Discord](https://discord.com/channels/795981131316985866/796153351372275743) and DM *leighman* for further info.

- **Microsub**: [TS Developer](https://x.com/0xdownshift/status/1880013835878154510)

- **Samsung Food**: [Full Stack Developer](https://whisk.bamboohr.com/careers/110)

- **Margins**: [Product Engineer](https://margins.app/jobs/product-engineer)

- **[Precurion](https://precurion.com/)** looking for a remote‑first Founding Engineer with Effect experience – See the job posting in the `#job-board` channel on [our Discord](https://discord.com/channels/795981131316985866/796153351372275743/1362610725931061258).

- **Vitalize Care** is hiring a full-stack engineer with Effect experience: [Full-Stack Engineer](https://jobs.ashbyhq.com/vitalize/d907ba5f-0f2f-4bb4-931a-1680d6daf81a)

- **Embedded Insurance** is hiring for a [Senior Software Engineering](https://embeddedinsurance.bamboohr.com/careers/23) position.

- **Betalyra**, an AI consulting company from Portugal, is looking for a part-time freelance software engineer (TypeScript/Effect) with AI experience – see the job posting in the `#job-board` channel on [our Discord](https://discord.com/channels/795981131316985866/796153351372275743/1362610725931061258).

- **Software Intelligence Works**: [Senior Full-Stack Engineer](https://remotive.com/remote-jobs/software-dev/senior-full-stack-engineer-2011648)

- **14.ai**: [Founding engineer](https://14.ai/careers)

- **Wander** is hiring [Software Developers](https://ship.wander.com) with experience in Effect.

- **Glide**: [Senior Frontend Product Engineer](https://www.glideapps.com/jobs/frontend-product-engineer)

- **Supermemory**: [Founding Backend / Infrastructure Engineer](https://x.com/i/jobs/1928194391946186862)

- **Ressio**: [Senior full stack Engineer](https://crocus-hardhat-6f7.notion.site/Senior-full-stack-engineer-back-end-leaning-28ce06d15219800eb2bcca558d9f0446)

- **Stealth team** looking for a software engineer with Effect experience – see the job posting in the `#job-board` channel on [our Discord](https://discord.com/channels/795981131316985866/796153351372275743/1362610725931061258).

- **A French-speaking** startup team led by Stephan Le Dorze is looking for a freelancer to join them - [see his LinkedIn post](https://www.linkedin.com/posts/stephaneledorze_recherche-senior-typescript-developer-activity-7384894173604265984-btNb) for more details.

- **Freckle.io** is hiring [Platform Engineers](https://x.com/code_typist/status/1930326662677434561) with experience in Effect.

- **A stealth team** that has already scaled their product to 50K daily active users in the last year, is looking for [Effect Developers](https://x.com/wireless_dev/status/1930314012723687739). DM [wireless](https://x.com/wireless_dev) on X for more info.

- Job opening for [Japanese-speaking developers](https://note.com/luma/n/n679d4dcdb363)

- **VST**: [Senior Full Stack Software Engineer](https://www.linkedin.com/jobs/view/3854111540/)

- **Globe Commerce**: [Founding Product Engineer](https://www.linkedin.com/jobs/view/4264203054)

- **Introw**: [Staff Software Engineer](https://join.com/companies/introw/14395111-staff-software-engineer)

- **Gale**: [SWE Intern - Remote (CAN/US)](https://forms.galevisa.com/r/m6gr7e)

- **Heartbeat**: [Senior Software Engineer](https://jobs.heartbeat.chat/35182) 

- **Superwall**: [Full-stack Mobile Developer](https://x.com/jakemor/status/1972770955500876070)

- **Tranched**: [Full-stack Engineer Web3](https://tranched.fi/careers/fullstack-developer-web3)

- **spring.new**, Anthropic's flagship customer, is hiring engineers experienced in Effect. See the job posting in the `#job-board` channel on [our Discord](https://discord.com/channels/795981131316985866/796153351372275743/1405134163287343196).

- **ManageSpace** is looking for a Senior Developer to mentor other developers and migrate to Effect – see the job posting in the `#job-board` channel on [our Discord](https://discord.com/channels/795981131316985866/796153351372275743/1389557459949060098).

- **coteach.ai** is looking for a Software Engineer – see the job posting in the `#job-board` channel on [our Discord](https://discord.com/channels/795981131316985866/796153351372275743/1394724166309253290) and DM *Peter Edmonds* for further info.

- **Small SaaS team** is looking for a part-time Effect Developer to implement Effect in their stack. The job posting is available in the `#job-board` channel on [our Discord](https://discord.com/channels/795981131316985866/796153351372275743/1397684638834491412), DM *jonpage* for further info.

- **PhosPhor** is [hiring engineers](https://phosphor.co/) experienced in Effect. You may also reach out to the Phosphor team on [our Discord](https://discord.com/channels/795981131316985866/796153351372275743/1418407399139578067).

- **Warp** is hiring a [Product Engineer](https://www.joinwarp.com/careers/roles?ashby_jid=655962db-5fbe-40cc-a072-9522295b3cbc)

- **Sellhub** is looking for a Backend Engineer. See the job posting in the `#job-board` channel on [our Discord](https://discord.com/channels/795981131316985866/796153351372275743/1423684096428736652).

- **Goblins** is looking for a Product Founding Engineer. See the job posting in the `#job-board` channel on [our Discord](https://discord.com/channels/795981131316985866/796153351372275743/1439740311277404231).

_Disclaimer: Please note that these job postings are shared for informational purposes, and we encourage applicants to verify details directly with the hiring companies._


&nbsp;
## Effect Merch Store

The [Effect Merch Store](https://effect.website/merch) offers a selection of Effect-branded items designed for the community. All orders are processed and fully managed through [Printful](https://www.printful.com/).

<Tweet id="1868605126862385238" />


&nbsp;
## Closing Notes

That's all for this week. Thank you for being a vital part of our community. Your feedback is highly valued as we fine-tune this format. Feel free to share your thoughts, and we'll do our best to tailor it to the needs of our community.

_Effect Community Team_
