content/tutorials/basics/index.mdx, before:

---
title: Welcome
excerpt: Learn the basics of Effect by exploring fundamental concepts and core data types.
section: The Basics of Effect
difficulty: beginner
prerequisites:
  - Familiarity with asynchronous programming in JavaScript
  - Basic understanding of TypeScript syntax and features
---

### What is Effect?

Effect is a powerful TypeScript library designed to help developers easily create complex, synchronous, and asynchronous programs.

The benefits include:

- Maximum Type-safety (incl. error handling)
- Makes your code more composable, reusable and testable
- Extensive library with a rich ecosystem of packages
- Clustering and Workflows (Alpha)

### How to use this tutorial

To the right is an editor & console window. As you make changes to the code in the editor, the program will re-run and show the output in the console.

Each section will present an exercise designed to illustrate a feature. Later exercises build on the knowledge gained in earlier ones, so it's recommended that you go from start to finish. If necessary, you can navigate via the menu above.

If you want to view the recommended solution to an exercise, click the "Show Solution" button.

Commit message:

continue working on basics tutorial

content/tutorials/basics/index.mdx, after:

---
title: Welcome
excerpt: Learn the basics of Effect by exploring fundamental concepts and core data types.
section: The Basics of Effect
difficulty: beginner
prerequisites:
  - Familiarity with asynchronous programming in JavaScript
  - Basic understanding of TypeScript syntax and features
---

### Welcome!

Welcome to Effect tutorials! Here, you will find clear, concise, and interactive
guides designed to enhance your skills with Effect and deepen your understanding
of all that Effect and its ecosystem provides!

Let's get started!

### What is Effect?

Effect is a powerful TypeScript library designed to help developers easily
create complex, synchronous, and asynchronous programs.

Some of the many benefits of Effect include:

- Maximum Type-safety (incl. error handling)
- Makes your code more composable, reusable and testable
- Extensive library with a rich ecosystem of packages
- Clustering and Workflows (Alpha)

### How to use this tutorial

On the right-hand side of the screen is both a code editor and a console window.
As you make changes to the code in the editor, the program will re-run and show
the output in the console.

Each section will present an exercise designed to illustrate a feature or
enhance understanding of a particular concept. Later exercises build on the
knowledge gained in earlier ones, so it's recommended that you proceed through
the tutorial in order from start to finish. If necessary, you can navigate
through the tutorial using the drop-down menu above.

If get stuck on a particular execerice and would like to view the recommended
solution, you can click the "Show Solution" button in the upper right-hand
corner of the editor.
