content/docs/400-guides/720-style/100-dual.mdx, before:

---
title: Dual APIs
excerpt: Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet, consetetur sadipscing elitr, sed diam nonumy eirmod tempor invidunt ut labore.
bottomNavigation: pagination
---

When you're working with APIs in the Effect ecosystem, you may come across two different ways to use the same API. These two ways are called the "data-last" and "data-first" variants.

<Info>
  From a technical perspective, these variants are implemented using two
  TypeScript overloads.
</Info>

When an API supports both variants, we call them "dual" APIs.

Let's explore these two variants using a concrete example of a dual API: `Effect.map`.

The `Effect.map` function is defined with two TypeScript overloads. The terms "data-last" and "data-first" refer to the position of the `self` argument (also known as the "data") in the signatures of the two overloads:

```ts
export declare const map: {
  // data-last
  <A, B>(f: (a: A) => B): <R, E>(self: Effect<R, E, A>) => Effect<R, E, B>
  // data-first
  <R, E, A, B>(self: Effect<R, E, A>, f: (a: A) => B): Effect<R, E, B>
}
```

## data-last

In the first overload, the `self` argument comes in the **last position**:

```ts
<A, B>(f: (a: A) => B): <R, E>(self: Effect<R, E, A>) => Effect<R, E, B>
```

This is the variant we have been using with `pipe`. You pass the `Effect` as the first argument to the `pipe` function, followed by a call to `Effect.map`:

```ts
const mappedEffect = pipe(effect, Effect.map(func))
```

This variant is useful when you need to chain multiple computations in a long pipeline. You can continue the pipeline by adding more computations after the initial transformation:

```ts
pipe(effect, Effect.map(func1), Effect.flatMap(func2), ...)
```

## data-first

In the second overload, the `self` argument comes in the **first position**:

```ts
<R, E, A, B>(self: Effect<R, E, A>, f: (a: A) => B): Effect<R, E, B>
```

This variant doesn't require the `pipe` function. Instead, you can directly pass the `Effect` as the first argument to the `Effect.map` function:

```ts
const mappedEffect = Effect.map(effect, func)
```

This variant is convenient when you only need to perform a single operation on the `Effect`.

<Design>
  **Choosing Between the variants**. It's important to note that both
  overloads achieve the same result. They are simply two different ways of
  expressing the code. You can choose the overload that best fits your coding
  style and makes the code more readable for you and your team.
</Design>

Commit message:

replace excerpt placeholders with actual content (index pages excluded)

content/docs/400-guides/720-style/100-dual.mdx, after:

---
title: Dual APIs
excerpt: Explore "data-last" and "data-first" variants of dual APIs in the Effect ecosystem, illustrated with the example of `Effect.map`. Learn how to choose between them based on your coding style and readability preferences.
bottomNavigation: pagination
---

When you're working with APIs in the Effect ecosystem, you may come across two different ways to use the same API. These two ways are called the "data-last" and "data-first" variants.

<Info>
  From a technical perspective, these variants are implemented using two
  TypeScript overloads.
</Info>

When an API supports both variants, we call them "dual" APIs.

Let's explore these two variants using a concrete example of a dual API: `Effect.map`.

The `Effect.map` function is defined with two TypeScript overloads. The terms "data-last" and "data-first" refer to the position of the `self` argument (also known as the "data") in the signatures of the two overloads:

```ts
export declare const map: {
  // data-last
  <A, B>(f: (a: A) => B): <R, E>(self: Effect<R, E, A>) => Effect<R, E, B>
  // data-first
  <R, E, A, B>(self: Effect<R, E, A>, f: (a: A) => B): Effect<R, E, B>
}
```

## data-last

In the first overload, the `self` argument comes in the **last position**:

```ts
<A, B>(f: (a: A) => B): <R, E>(self: Effect<R, E, A>) => Effect<R, E, B>
```

This is the variant we have been using with `pipe`. You pass the `Effect` as the first argument to the `pipe` function, followed by a call to `Effect.map`:

```ts
const mappedEffect = pipe(effect, Effect.map(func))
```

This variant is useful when you need to chain multiple computations in a long pipeline. You can continue the pipeline by adding more computations after the initial transformation:

```ts
pipe(effect, Effect.map(func1), Effect.flatMap(func2), ...)
```

## data-first

In the second overload, the `self` argument comes in the **first position**:

```ts
<R, E, A, B>(self: Effect<R, E, A>, f: (a: A) => B): Effect<R, E, B>
```

This variant doesn't require the `pipe` function. Instead, you can directly pass the `Effect` as the first argument to the `Effect.map` function:

```ts
const mappedEffect = Effect.map(effect, func)
```

This variant is convenient when you only need to perform a single operation on the `Effect`.

<Design>
  **Choosing Between the variants**. It's important to note that both
  overloads achieve the same result. They are simply two different ways of
  expressing the code. You can choose the overload that best fits your coding
  style and makes the code more readable for you and your team.
</Design>
