content/docs/400-guides/720-style/200-branded-types.mdx, before:

---
title: Branded Types
excerpt: Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet, consetetur sadipscing elitr, sed diam nonumy eirmod tempor invidunt ut labore.
---

In this guide, we will explore the concept of **branded types** in TypeScript and learn how to create and work with them using the `Brand` module. Branded types are TypeScript types with an added type tag that helps prevent accidental usage of a value in the wrong context. They allow us to create distinct types based on an existing underlying type, enabling type safety and better code organization.

## Understanding Branded Types

Branded types allow us to create new types in TypeScript by adding a type tag to an existing underlying type. This type tag, also known as the "brand," distinguishes values of the branded type from other values of the same underlying type. The brand acts as a compile-time check, ensuring that values are used correctly in the intended context.

## Creating Branded Types

The `Brand` module provides two main functions for creating branded types: `refined` and `nominal`. Let's understand each of them:

### 1. Refined Branded Types

The `refined` function is used to create a new branded type that performs validation on the input data. It takes a refinement predicate as an argument, which is a function that determines whether the input data is valid for the branded type. If the input data fails the validation, a `BrandErrors` data type is returned, providing information about the specific validation failure.

Here's an example of creating a refined branded type:

```ts twoslash
import { Brand } from "effect"

type Int = number & Brand.Brand<"Int">

const Int = Brand.refined<Int>(
  (n) => Number.isInteger(n), // Check if the value is an integer
  (n) => Brand.error(`Expected ${n} to be an integer`) // Error message if the value is not an integer
)
```

In this example, we create a branded type called `Int` using the `Brand.refined` function. The refinement predicate ensures that the input value is an integer. If the value fails the validation, an error message is provided using the `Brand.error` function.

Now, let's see how we can use the `Int` branded type:

```ts twoslash
import { Brand } from "effect"

type Int = number & Brand.Brand<"Int">

const Int = Brand.refined<Int>(
  (n) => Number.isInteger(n), // Check if the value is an integer
  (n) => Brand.error(`Expected ${n} to be an integer`) // Error message if the value is not an integer
)

// ---cut---
// Create a value of type Int
const x: Int = Int(3)
console.log(x) // Output: 3

// Attempt to create a value of type Int with a non-integer value
const y: Int = Int(3.14) // throws [ { message: 'Expected 3.14 to be an integer' } ]
```

By enforcing the `Int` brand, we can ensure that only integer values are used in the designated context.
Attempting to assign a non-`Int` value will result in a compile-time error:

```ts twoslash
// @errors: 2322
import { Brand } from "effect"

type Int = number & Brand.Brand<"Int">

const Int = Brand.refined<Int>(
  (n) => Number.isInteger(n), // Check if the value is an integer
  (n) => Brand.error(`Expected ${n} to be an integer`) // Error message if the value is not an integer
)

// ---cut---
const good: Int = Int(3)

const bad1: Int = 3

const bad2: Int = 3.14
```

### 2. Nominal Branded Types

The `nominal` function is used to create a new branded type without performing any runtime checks. It simply adds a type tag to the underlying type, allowing us to distinguish between values of the same type but with different meanings. Nominal branded types are useful when we only want to create distinct types for clarity and code organization purposes.

Here's an example of creating a nominal branded type:

```ts twoslash
import { Brand } from "effect"

type UserId = number & Brand.Brand<"UserId">

const UserId = Brand.nominal<UserId>()
```

In the previous example, we created a nominal branded type called `UserId` using the `Brand.nominal` function. The `UserId` type is based on the underlying type `number`, but it has a distinct type tag that differentiates it from other `number` values.

Now, let's see how we can use the `UserId` branded type:

```ts twoslash
// @errors: 2322
import { Brand } from "effect"

type UserId = number & Brand.Brand<"UserId">

const UserId = Brand.nominal<UserId>()

// ---cut---
// Create a value of type UserId with a valid value
const id1: UserId = UserId(1)
console.log(id1) // Output: 1

// Create another value of type UserId with a different valid value
const id2: UserId = UserId(2)
console.log(id2) // Output: 2

// Attempt to create a value of type UserId with a non-branded number
const id3: UserId = 3
```

By enforcing the `UserId` brand, we can ensure that only values explicitly created as `UserId` are used in the designated context. Assigning a regular `number` value to a `UserId` variable will result in a type error.

Nominal branded types help improve code clarity and prevent accidental mixing of values with different meanings. They are especially useful when working with identifiers, unique keys, or any scenario where distinguishing between values is important.

## Using Branded Types in Functions

Branded types can be used in function signatures to provide stronger type guarantees. Let's see how we can incorporate branded types in function parameters and return types.

```ts
const getUserById = (id: UserId): User => {
  // Retrieve user from the database based on the UserId
}

const createUser = (name: string, email: string): UserId => {
  // Create a new user and return the generated UserId
}
```

In the `getUserById` function, we specify that the `id` parameter must be of type `UserId`. This ensures that only valid `UserId` values are accepted when calling the function.

Similarly, in the `createUser` function, we specify that the return type is `UserId`. This guarantees that the function will always return a valid `UserId` value.

By using branded types in function signatures, we can catch potential bugs at compile-time and reduce the likelihood of passing incorrect values to functions.

## Combining Branded Types

In some scenarios, you may need to combine multiple branded types together. The `Brand` module provides the `all` API to facilitate this:

```ts twoslash
import { Brand } from "effect"

type Int = number & Brand.Brand<"Int">

const Int = Brand.refined<Int>(
  (n) => Number.isInteger(n),
  (n) => Brand.error(`Expected ${n} to be an integer`)
)

type Positive = number & Brand.Brand<"Positive">

const Positive = Brand.refined<Positive>(
  (n) => n > 0,
  (n) => Brand.error(`Expected ${n} to be positive`)
)

// Combine the Int and Positive branded types into a new branded type PositiveInt
const PositiveInt = Brand.all(Int, Positive)

// Extract the branded type from the PositiveInt constructor
type PositiveInt = Brand.Brand.FromConstructor<typeof PositiveInt>

// Usage example
const value1: PositiveInt = PositiveInt(10) // Valid positive integer
const value2: PositiveInt = PositiveInt(-5) // throws [ { message: 'Expected -5 to be positive' } ]
const value3: PositiveInt = PositiveInt(3.14) // throws [ { message: 'Expected 3.14 to be an integer' } ]
```

Commit message:

replace excerpt placeholders with actual content (index pages excluded)

content/docs/400-guides/720-style/200-branded-types.mdx, after:

---
title: Branded Types
excerpt: Explore the concept of branded types in TypeScript using the Brand module. Understand the "data-last" and "data-first" variants, and learn to create branded types with runtime validation (refined) and without checks (nominal). Discover how to use and combine branded types to enforce type safety in your code.
bottomNavigation: pagination
---

In this guide, we will explore the concept of **branded types** in TypeScript and learn how to create and work with them using the `Brand` module. Branded types are TypeScript types with an added type tag that helps prevent accidental usage of a value in the wrong context. They allow us to create distinct types based on an existing underlying type, enabling type safety and better code organization.

## Understanding Branded Types

Branded types allow us to create new types in TypeScript by adding a type tag to an existing underlying type. This type tag, also known as the "brand," distinguishes values of the branded type from other values of the same underlying type. The brand acts as a compile-time check, ensuring that values are used correctly in the intended context.

## Creating Branded Types

The `Brand` module provides two main functions for creating branded types: `refined` and `nominal`. Let's understand each of them:

### 1. Refined Branded Types

The `refined` function is used to create a new branded type that performs validation on the input data. It takes a refinement predicate as an argument, which is a function that determines whether the input data is valid for the branded type. If the input data fails the validation, a `BrandErrors` data type is returned, providing information about the specific validation failure.

Here's an example of creating a refined branded type:

```ts twoslash
import { Brand } from "effect"

type Int = number & Brand.Brand<"Int">

const Int = Brand.refined<Int>(
  (n) => Number.isInteger(n), // Check if the value is an integer
  (n) => Brand.error(`Expected ${n} to be an integer`) // Error message if the value is not an integer
)
```

In this example, we create a branded type called `Int` using the `Brand.refined` function. The refinement predicate ensures that the input value is an integer. If the value fails the validation, an error message is provided using the `Brand.error` function.

Now, let's see how we can use the `Int` branded type:

```ts twoslash
import { Brand } from "effect"

type Int = number & Brand.Brand<"Int">

const Int = Brand.refined<Int>(
  (n) => Number.isInteger(n), // Check if the value is an integer
  (n) => Brand.error(`Expected ${n} to be an integer`) // Error message if the value is not an integer
)

// ---cut---
// Create a value of type Int
const x: Int = Int(3)
console.log(x) // Output: 3

// Attempt to create a value of type Int with a non-integer value
const y: Int = Int(3.14) // throws [ { message: 'Expected 3.14 to be an integer' } ]
```

By enforcing the `Int` brand, we can ensure that only integer values are used in the designated context.
Attempting to assign a non-`Int` value will result in a compile-time error:

```ts twoslash
// @errors: 2322
import { Brand } from "effect"

type Int = number & Brand.Brand<"Int">

const Int = Brand.refined<Int>(
  (n) => Number.isInteger(n), // Check if the value is an integer
  (n) => Brand.error(`Expected ${n} to be an integer`) // Error message if the value is not an integer
)

// ---cut---
const good: Int = Int(3)

const bad1: Int = 3

const bad2: Int = 3.14
```

### 2. Nominal Branded Types

The `nominal` function is used to create a new branded type without performing any runtime checks. It simply adds a type tag to the underlying type, allowing us to distinguish between values of the same type but with different meanings. Nominal branded types are useful when we only want to create distinct types for clarity and code organization purposes.

Here's an example of creating a nominal branded type:

```ts twoslash
import { Brand } from "effect"

type UserId = number & Brand.Brand<"UserId">

const UserId = Brand.nominal<UserId>()
```

In the previous example, we created a nominal branded type called `UserId` using the `Brand.nominal` function. The `UserId` type is based on the underlying type `number`, but it has a distinct type tag that differentiates it from other `number` values.

Now, let's see how we can use the `UserId` branded type:

```ts twoslash
// @errors: 2322
import { Brand } from "effect"

type UserId = number & Brand.Brand<"UserId">

const UserId = Brand.nominal<UserId>()

// ---cut---
// Create a value of type UserId with a valid value
const id1: UserId = UserId(1)
console.log(id1) // Output: 1

// Create another value of type UserId with a different valid value
const id2: UserId = UserId(2)
console.log(id2) // Output: 2

// Attempt to create a value of type UserId with a non-branded number
const id3: UserId = 3
```

By enforcing the `UserId` brand, we can ensure that only values explicitly created as `UserId` are used in the designated context. Assigning a regular `number` value to a `UserId` variable will result in a type error.

Nominal branded types help improve code clarity and prevent accidental mixing of values with different meanings. They are especially useful when working with identifiers, unique keys, or any scenario where distinguishing between values is important.

## Using Branded Types in Functions

Branded types can be used in function signatures to provide stronger type guarantees. Let's see how we can incorporate branded types in function parameters and return types.

```ts
const getUserById = (id: UserId): User => {
  // Retrieve user from the database based on the UserId
}

const createUser = (name: string, email: string): UserId => {
  // Create a new user and return the generated UserId
}
```

In the `getUserById` function, we specify that the `id` parameter must be of type `UserId`. This ensures that only valid `UserId` values are accepted when calling the function.

Similarly, in the `createUser` function, we specify that the return type is `UserId`. This guarantees that the function will always return a valid `UserId` value.

By using branded types in function signatures, we can catch potential bugs at compile-time and reduce the likelihood of passing incorrect values to functions.

## Combining Branded Types

In some scenarios, you may need to combine multiple branded types together. The `Brand` module provides the `all` API to facilitate this:

```ts twoslash
import { Brand } from "effect"

type Int = number & Brand.Brand<"Int">

const Int = Brand.refined<Int>(
  (n) => Number.isInteger(n),
  (n) => Brand.error(`Expected ${n} to be an integer`)
)

type Positive = number & Brand.Brand<"Positive">

const Positive = Brand.refined<Positive>(
  (n) => n > 0,
  (n) => Brand.error(`Expected ${n} to be positive`)
)

// Combine the Int and Positive branded types into a new branded type PositiveInt
const PositiveInt = Brand.all(Int, Positive)

// Extract the branded type from the PositiveInt constructor
type PositiveInt = Brand.Brand.FromConstructor<typeof PositiveInt>

// Usage example
const value1: PositiveInt = PositiveInt(10) // Valid positive integer
const value2: PositiveInt = PositiveInt(-5) // throws [ { message: 'Expected -5 to be positive' } ]
const value3: PositiveInt = PositiveInt(3.14) // throws [ { message: 'Expected 3.14 to be an integer' } ]
```
