content/docs/400-guides/720-style/400-do.mdx, before:

---
title: Simplifying Excessive Nesting
excerpt: Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet, consetetur sadipscing elitr, sed diam nonumy eirmod tempor invidunt ut labore.
---

Suppose you want to create a custom function `elapsed` that prints the elapsed time taken by an effect to execute.

## Using plain pipe

Initially, you may come up with code that uses the standard `pipe` [method](../essentials/pipeline#the-pipe-method), but this approach can lead to excessive nesting and result in verbose and hard-to-read code:

```ts twoslash
import { Effect, Console } from "effect"

// Get the current timestamp
const now = Effect.sync(() => new Date().getTime())

// Prints the elapsed time occurred to `self` to execute
const elapsed = <R, E, A>(
  self: Effect.Effect<R, E, A>
): Effect.Effect<R, E, A> =>
  now.pipe(
    Effect.flatMap((startMillis) =>
      self.pipe(
        Effect.flatMap((result) =>
          now.pipe(
            Effect.flatMap((endMillis) => {
              // Calculate the elapsed time in milliseconds
              const elapsed = endMillis - startMillis
              // Log the elapsed time
              return Console.log(`Elapsed: ${elapsed}`).pipe(
                Effect.map(() => result)
              )
            })
          )
        )
      )
    )
  )

// Simulates a successful computation with a delay of 200 milliseconds
const task = Effect.succeed("some task").pipe(Effect.delay("200 millis"))

const program = elapsed(task)

Effect.runPromise(program).then(console.log)
/*
Output:
Elapsed: 204
some task
*/
```

To address this issue and make the code more manageable, there is a solution: the "do simulation."

## Using the "do simulation"

The "do simulation" in Effect allows you to write code in a more declarative style, similar to the "do notation" in other programming languages. It provides a way to define variables and perform operations on them using functions like `Effect.bind` and `Effect.let`.

Here's how the do simulation works:

1. Start the do simulation using the `Effect.Do` value:

   ```ts
   const program = Effect.Do.pipe(/* ... rest of the code */)
   ```

2. Within the do simulation scope, you can use the `Effect.bind` function to define variables and bind them to `Effect` values:

   ```ts
   Effect.bind("variableName", (scope) => effectValue)
   ```

- `variableName` is the name you choose for the variable you want to define. It must be unique within the scope.
- `effectValue` is the `Effect` value that you want to bind to the variable. It can be the result of a function call or any other valid `Effect` value.

3. You can accumulate multiple `Effect.bind` statements to define multiple variables within the scope:

   ```ts
   Effect.bind("variable1", () => effectValue1),
   Effect.bind("variable2", ({ variable1 }) => effectValue2),
   // ... additional bind statements
   ```

4. Inside the do simulation scope, you can also use the `Effect.let` function to define variables and bind them to simple values:

   ```ts
   Effect.let("variableName", (scope) => simpleValue)
   ```

- `variableName` is the name you give to the variable. Like before, it must be unique within the scope.
- `simpleValue` is the value you want to assign to the variable. It can be a simple value like a `number`, `string`, or `boolean`.

5. Regular Effect functions like `Effect.flatMap`, `Effect.tap`, and `Effect.map` can still be used within the do simulation. These functions will receive the accumulated variables as arguments within the scope:

   ```ts
   Effect.flatMap(({ variable1, variable2 }) => {
     // Perform operations using variable1 and variable2
     // Return an `Effect` value as the result
   })
   ```

With the do simulation, you can rewrite the `elapsed` combinator like this:

```ts twoslash
import { Effect, Console } from "effect"

// Get the current timestamp
const now = Effect.sync(() => new Date().getTime())

const elapsed = <R, E, A>(
  self: Effect.Effect<R, E, A>
): Effect.Effect<R, E, A> =>
  Effect.Do.pipe(
    Effect.bind("startMillis", () => now),
    Effect.bind("result", () => self),
    Effect.bind("endMillis", () => now),
    Effect.let(
      "elapsed",
      ({ startMillis, endMillis }) => endMillis - startMillis // Calculate the elapsed time in milliseconds
    ),
    Effect.tap(({ elapsed }) => Console.log(`Elapsed: ${elapsed}`)), // Log the elapsed time
    Effect.map(({ result }) => result)
  )

// Simulates a successful computation with a delay of 200 milliseconds
const task = Effect.succeed("some task").pipe(Effect.delay("200 millis"))

const program = elapsed(task)

Effect.runPromise(program).then(console.log)
/*
Output:
Elapsed: 204
some task
*/
```

In this solution, we use the do simulation to simplify the code. The `elapsed` function now starts with `Effect.Do` to enter the simulation scope.
Inside the scope, we use `Effect.bind` to define variables and bind them to the corresponding effects.

## Using `Effect.gen`

The most concise and convenient solution is to use the `Effect.gen` constructor, which allows you to work with [generators](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Generator) when dealing with effects. This approach leverages the native scope provided by the generator syntax, avoiding excessive nesting and leading to more concise code.

```ts twoslash
import { Effect } from "effect"

// Get the current timestamp
const now = Effect.sync(() => new Date().getTime())

// Prints the elapsed time occurred to `self` to execute
const elapsed = <R, E, A>(
  self: Effect.Effect<R, E, A>
): Effect.Effect<R, E, A> =>
  Effect.gen(function* (_) {
    const startMillis = yield* _(now)
    const result = yield* _(self)
    const endMillis = yield* _(now)
    // Calculate the elapsed time in milliseconds
    const elapsed = endMillis - startMillis
    // Log the elapsed time
    console.log(`Elapsed: ${elapsed}`)
    return result
  })

// Simulates a successful computation with a delay of 200 milliseconds
const task = Effect.succeed("some task").pipe(Effect.delay("200 millis"))

const program = elapsed(task)

Effect.runPromise(program).then(console.log)
/*
Output:
Elapsed: 204
some task
*/
```

In this solution, we switch to using [generators](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Generator) to simplify the code. The `elapsed` function now uses a generator function (`Effect.gen`) to define the flow of execution. Within the generator, we use `yield*` to invoke effects and bind their results to variables. This eliminates the nesting and provides a more readable and sequential code structure.

The generator style in Effect uses a more linear and sequential flow of execution, resembling traditional imperative programming languages. This makes the code easier to read and understand, especially for developers who are more familiar with imperative programming paradigms.

On the other hand, the pipe style can lead to excessive nesting, especially when dealing with complex effectful computations. This can make the code harder to follow and debug.

For more information on how to use generators in Effect, you can refer to the [Using Generators in Effect](../essentials/using-generators) guide.

Commit message:

replace excerpt placeholders with actual content (index pages excluded) (#424)

content/docs/400-guides/720-style/400-do.mdx, after:

---
title: Simplifying Excessive Nesting
excerpt: Learn how to simplify code with the `elapsed` function using different approaches. The guide demonstrates using plain pipe, the "do simulation," and the concise `Effect.gen` constructor to calculate and log the elapsed time for an effect's execution. Choose the method that fits your coding style and enhances code readability.
bottomNavigation: pagination
---

Suppose you want to create a custom function `elapsed` that prints the elapsed time taken by an effect to execute.

## Using plain pipe

Initially, you may come up with code that uses the standard `pipe` [method](../essentials/pipeline#the-pipe-method), but this approach can lead to excessive nesting and result in verbose and hard-to-read code:

```ts twoslash
import { Effect, Console } from "effect"

// Get the current timestamp
const now = Effect.sync(() => new Date().getTime())

// Prints the elapsed time occurred to `self` to execute
const elapsed = <R, E, A>(
  self: Effect.Effect<R, E, A>
): Effect.Effect<R, E, A> =>
  now.pipe(
    Effect.flatMap((startMillis) =>
      self.pipe(
        Effect.flatMap((result) =>
          now.pipe(
            Effect.flatMap((endMillis) => {
              // Calculate the elapsed time in milliseconds
              const elapsed = endMillis - startMillis
              // Log the elapsed time
              return Console.log(`Elapsed: ${elapsed}`).pipe(
                Effect.map(() => result)
              )
            })
          )
        )
      )
    )
  )

// Simulates a successful computation with a delay of 200 milliseconds
const task = Effect.succeed("some task").pipe(Effect.delay("200 millis"))

const program = elapsed(task)

Effect.runPromise(program).then(console.log)
/*
Output:
Elapsed: 204
some task
*/
```

To address this issue and make the code more manageable, there is a solution: the "do simulation."

## Using the "do simulation"

The "do simulation" in Effect allows you to write code in a more declarative style, similar to the "do notation" in other programming languages. It provides a way to define variables and perform operations on them using functions like `Effect.bind` and `Effect.let`.

Here's how the do simulation works:

1. Start the do simulation using the `Effect.Do` value:

   ```ts
   const program = Effect.Do.pipe(/* ... rest of the code */)
   ```

2. Within the do simulation scope, you can use the `Effect.bind` function to define variables and bind them to `Effect` values:

   ```ts
   Effect.bind("variableName", (scope) => effectValue)
   ```

- `variableName` is the name you choose for the variable you want to define. It must be unique within the scope.
- `effectValue` is the `Effect` value that you want to bind to the variable. It can be the result of a function call or any other valid `Effect` value.

3. You can accumulate multiple `Effect.bind` statements to define multiple variables within the scope:

   ```ts
   Effect.bind("variable1", () => effectValue1),
   Effect.bind("variable2", ({ variable1 }) => effectValue2),
   // ... additional bind statements
   ```

4. Inside the do simulation scope, you can also use the `Effect.let` function to define variables and bind them to simple values:

   ```ts
   Effect.let("variableName", (scope) => simpleValue)
   ```

- `variableName` is the name you give to the variable. Like before, it must be unique within the scope.
- `simpleValue` is the value you want to assign to the variable. It can be a simple value like a `number`, `string`, or `boolean`.

5. Regular Effect functions like `Effect.flatMap`, `Effect.tap`, and `Effect.map` can still be used within the do simulation. These functions will receive the accumulated variables as arguments within the scope:

   ```ts
   Effect.flatMap(({ variable1, variable2 }) => {
     // Perform operations using variable1 and variable2
     // Return an `Effect` value as the result
   })
   ```

With the do simulation, you can rewrite the `elapsed` combinator like this:

```ts twoslash
import { Effect, Console } from "effect"

// Get the current timestamp
const now = Effect.sync(() => new Date().getTime())

const elapsed = <R, E, A>(
  self: Effect.Effect<R, E, A>
): Effect.Effect<R, E, A> =>
  Effect.Do.pipe(
    Effect.bind("startMillis", () => now),
    Effect.bind("result", () => self),
    Effect.bind("endMillis", () => now),
    Effect.let(
      "elapsed",
      ({ startMillis, endMillis }) => endMillis - startMillis // Calculate the elapsed time in milliseconds
    ),
    Effect.tap(({ elapsed }) => Console.log(`Elapsed: ${elapsed}`)), // Log the elapsed time
    Effect.map(({ result }) => result)
  )

// Simulates a successful computation with a delay of 200 milliseconds
const task = Effect.succeed("some task").pipe(Effect.delay("200 millis"))

const program = elapsed(task)

Effect.runPromise(program).then(console.log)
/*
Output:
Elapsed: 204
some task
*/
```

In this solution, we use the do simulation to simplify the code. The `elapsed` function now starts with `Effect.Do` to enter the simulation scope.
Inside the scope, we use `Effect.bind` to define variables and bind them to the corresponding effects.

## Using `Effect.gen`

The most concise and convenient solution is to use the `Effect.gen` constructor, which allows you to work with [generators](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Generator) when dealing with effects. This approach leverages the native scope provided by the generator syntax, avoiding excessive nesting and leading to more concise code.

```ts twoslash
import { Effect } from "effect"

// Get the current timestamp
const now = Effect.sync(() => new Date().getTime())

// Prints the elapsed time occurred to `self` to execute
const elapsed = <R, E, A>(
  self: Effect.Effect<R, E, A>
): Effect.Effect<R, E, A> =>
  Effect.gen(function* (_) {
    const startMillis = yield* _(now)
    const result = yield* _(self)
    const endMillis = yield* _(now)
    // Calculate the elapsed time in milliseconds
    const elapsed = endMillis - startMillis
    // Log the elapsed time
    console.log(`Elapsed: ${elapsed}`)
    return result
  })

// Simulates a successful computation with a delay of 200 milliseconds
const task = Effect.succeed("some task").pipe(Effect.delay("200 millis"))

const program = elapsed(task)

Effect.runPromise(program).then(console.log)
/*
Output:
Elapsed: 204
some task
*/
```

In this solution, we switch to using [generators](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Generator) to simplify the code. The `elapsed` function now uses a generator function (`Effect.gen`) to define the flow of execution. Within the generator, we use `yield*` to invoke effects and bind their results to variables. This eliminates the nesting and provides a more readable and sequential code structure.

The generator style in Effect uses a more linear and sequential flow of execution, resembling traditional imperative programming languages. This makes the code easier to read and understand, especially for developers who are more familiar with imperative programming paradigms.

On the other hand, the pipe style can lead to excessive nesting, especially when dealing with complex effectful computations. This can make the code harder to follow and debug.

For more information on how to use generators in Effect, you can refer to the [Using Generators in Effect](../essentials/using-generators) guide.
