content/src/content/docs/docs/platform/introduction.mdx, before:

---
title: Introduction to Effect Platform
description: Build cross-platform applications with unified abstractions for Node.js, Deno, Bun, and browsers using @effect/platform.
sidebar:
  label: Introduction
  order: 0
---

import {
  Aside,
  Tabs,
  TabItem,
  Badge
} from "@astrojs/starlight/components"

`@effect/platform` is a library for building platform-independent abstractions in environments such as Node.js, Deno, Bun, and browsers.

With `@effect/platform`, you can integrate abstract services like [FileSystem](/docs/platform/file-system/) or [Terminal](/docs/platform/terminal/) into your program.
When assembling your final application, you can provide specific [layers](/docs/requirements-management/layers/) for the target platform using the corresponding packages:

- `@effect/platform-node` for Node.js or Deno
- `@effect/platform-bun` for Bun
- `@effect/platform-browser` for browsers

### Stable Modules

The following modules are stable and their documentation is available on this website:

| Module                                           | Description                                       | Status                                    |
| ------------------------------------------------ | ------------------------------------------------- | ----------------------------------------- |
| [Command](/docs/platform/command/)               | Provides a way to interact with the command line. | <Badge text="Stable" variant="success" /> |
| [FileSystem](/docs/platform/file-system/)        | A module for file system operations.              | <Badge text="Stable" variant="success" /> |
| [KeyValueStore](/docs/platform/key-value-store/) | Manages key-value pairs for data storage.         | <Badge text="Stable" variant="success" /> |
| [Path](/docs/platform/path/)                     | Utilities for working with file paths.            | <Badge text="Stable" variant="success" /> |
| [PlatformLogger](/docs/platform/platformlogger/) | Log messages to a file using the FileSystem APIs. | <Badge text="Stable" variant="success" /> |
| [Terminal](/docs/platform/terminal/)             | Tools for terminal interaction.                   | <Badge text="Stable" variant="success" /> |

### Unstable Modules

Some modules in `@effect/platform` are still in development or marked as experimental.
These features are subject to change.

| Module                                                                                               | Description                                     | Status                                      |
| ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | ----------------------------------------------- | ------------------------------------------- |
| [Http API](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/blob/main/packages/platform/README.md#http-api)       | Provide a declarative way to define HTTP APIs.  | <Badge text="Unstable" variant="caution" /> |
| [Http Client](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/blob/main/packages/platform/README.md#http-client) | A client for making HTTP requests.              | <Badge text="Unstable" variant="caution" /> |
| [Http Server](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/blob/main/packages/platform/README.md#http-server) | A server for handling HTTP requests.            | <Badge text="Unstable" variant="caution" /> |
| [Socket](https://effect-ts.github.io/effect/platform/Socket.ts.html)                                 | A module for socket-based communication.        | <Badge text="Unstable" variant="caution" /> |
| [Worker](https://effect-ts.github.io/effect/platform/Worker.ts.html)                                 | A module for running tasks in separate workers. | <Badge text="Unstable" variant="caution" /> |

For the most up-to-date documentation and details, please refer to the official [README](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/blob/main/packages/platform/README.md) of the package.

## Installation

To install the **beta** version:

<Tabs syncKey="package-manager">

<TabItem label="npm" icon="seti:npm">

```sh showLineNumbers=false
npm install @effect/platform
```

</TabItem>

<TabItem label="pnpm" icon="pnpm">

```sh showLineNumbers=false
pnpm add @effect/platform
```

</TabItem>

<TabItem label="Yarn" icon="yarn">

```sh showLineNumbers=false
yarn add @effect/platform
```

</TabItem>

<TabItem label="Bun" icon="bun">

```sh showLineNumbers=false
bun add @effect/platform
```

</TabItem>

<TabItem label="Deno" icon="deno">

```sh showLineNumbers=false
deno add npm:@effect/platform
```

</TabItem>

</Tabs>

## Getting Started with Cross-Platform Programming

Here's a basic example using the `Path` module to create a file path, which can run across different environments:

**Example** (Cross-Platform Path Handling)

```ts twoslash title="index.ts"
import { Path } from "@effect/platform"
import { Effect } from "effect"

const program = Effect.gen(function* () {
  // Access the Path service
  const path = yield* Path.Path

  // Join parts of a path to create a complete file path
  const mypath = path.join("tmp", "file.txt")

  console.log(mypath)
})
```

### Running the Program in Node.js or Deno

First, install the Node.js-specific package:

<Tabs syncKey="package-manager">

<TabItem label="npm" icon="seti:npm">

```sh showLineNumbers=false
npm install @effect/platform-node
```

</TabItem>

<TabItem label="pnpm" icon="pnpm">

```sh showLineNumbers=false
pnpm add @effect/platform-node
```

</TabItem>

<TabItem label="Yarn" icon="yarn">

```sh showLineNumbers=false
yarn add @effect/platform-node
```

</TabItem>

<TabItem label="Deno" icon="deno">

```sh showLineNumbers=false
deno add npm:@effect/platform-node
```

</TabItem>

</Tabs>

Update the program to load the Node.js-specific context:

**Example** (Providing Node.js Context)

```ts twoslash title="index.ts" ins={3,15}
import { Path } from "@effect/platform"
import { Effect } from "effect"
import { NodeContext, NodeRuntime } from "@effect/platform-node"

const program = Effect.gen(function* () {
  // Access the Path service
  const path = yield* Path.Path

  // Join parts of a path to create a complete file path
  const mypath = path.join("tmp", "file.txt")

  console.log(mypath)
})

NodeRuntime.runMain(program.pipe(Effect.provide(NodeContext.layer)))
```

Finally, run the program in Node.js using `tsx`, or directly in Deno:

<Tabs syncKey="package-manager">

<TabItem label="npm" icon="seti:npm">

```sh showLineNumbers=false
npx tsx index.ts
# Output: tmp/file.txt
```

</TabItem>

<TabItem label="pnpm" icon="pnpm">

```sh showLineNumbers=false
pnpm dlx tsx index.ts
# Output: tmp/file.txt
```

</TabItem>

<TabItem label="Yarn" icon="seti:yarn">

```sh showLineNumbers=false
yarn dlx tsx index.ts
# Output: tmp/file.txt
```

</TabItem>

<TabItem label="Deno" icon="deno">

```sh showLineNumbers=false
deno run index.ts
# Output: tmp/file.txt

# or

deno run -RE index.ts
# Output: tmp/file.txt
# (granting required Read and Environment permissions without being prompted)
```

</TabItem>

</Tabs>

### Running the Program in Bun

To run the same program in Bun, first install the Bun-specific package:

```sh showLineNumbers=false
bun add @effect/platform-bun
```

Update the program to use the Bun-specific context:

**Example** (Providing Bun Context)

```ts twoslash title="index.ts" ins={3,15}
import { Path } from "@effect/platform"
import { Effect } from "effect"
import { BunContext, BunRuntime } from "@effect/platform-bun"

const program = Effect.gen(function* () {
  // Access the Path service
  const path = yield* Path.Path

  // Join parts of a path to create a complete file path
  const mypath = path.join("tmp", "file.txt")

  console.log(mypath)
})

BunRuntime.runMain(program.pipe(Effect.provide(BunContext.layer)))
```

Run the program in Bun:

```sh showLineNumbers=false
bun index.ts
tmp/file.txt
```

Commit message:

Add Runtime module to platform

content/src/content/docs/docs/platform/introduction.mdx, after:

---
title: Introduction to Effect Platform
description: Build cross-platform applications with unified abstractions for Node.js, Deno, Bun, and browsers using @effect/platform.
sidebar:
  label: Introduction
  order: 0
---

import {
  Aside,
  Tabs,
  TabItem,
  Badge
} from "@astrojs/starlight/components"

`@effect/platform` is a library for building platform-independent abstractions in environments such as Node.js, Deno, Bun, and browsers.

With `@effect/platform`, you can integrate abstract services like [FileSystem](/docs/platform/file-system/) or [Terminal](/docs/platform/terminal/) into your program.
When assembling your final application, you can provide specific [layers](/docs/requirements-management/layers/) for the target platform using the corresponding packages:

- `@effect/platform-node` for Node.js or Deno
- `@effect/platform-bun` for Bun
- `@effect/platform-browser` for browsers

### Stable Modules

The following modules are stable and their documentation is available on this website:

| Module                                           | Description                                                | Status                                    |
| ------------------------------------------------ | ---------------------------------------------------------- | ----------------------------------------- |
| [Command](/docs/platform/command/)               | Provides a way to interact with the command line.          | <Badge text="Stable" variant="success" /> |
| [FileSystem](/docs/platform/file-system/)        | A module for file system operations.                       | <Badge text="Stable" variant="success" /> |
| [KeyValueStore](/docs/platform/key-value-store/) | Manages key-value pairs for data storage.                  | <Badge text="Stable" variant="success" /> |
| [Path](/docs/platform/path/)                     | Utilities for working with file paths.                     | <Badge text="Stable" variant="success" /> |
| [PlatformLogger](/docs/platform/platformlogger/) | Log messages to a file using the FileSystem APIs.          | <Badge text="Stable" variant="success" /> |
| [Runtime](/docs/platform/runtime/)               | Run your program with built-in error handling and logging. | <Badge text="Stable" variant="success" /> |
| [Terminal](/docs/platform/terminal/)             | Tools for terminal interaction.                            | <Badge text="Stable" variant="success" /> |

### Unstable Modules

Some modules in `@effect/platform` are still in development or marked as experimental.
These features are subject to change.

| Module                                                                                               | Description                                     | Status                                      |
| ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | ----------------------------------------------- | ------------------------------------------- |
| [Http API](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/blob/main/packages/platform/README.md#http-api)       | Provide a declarative way to define HTTP APIs.  | <Badge text="Unstable" variant="caution" /> |
| [Http Client](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/blob/main/packages/platform/README.md#http-client) | A client for making HTTP requests.              | <Badge text="Unstable" variant="caution" /> |
| [Http Server](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/blob/main/packages/platform/README.md#http-server) | A server for handling HTTP requests.            | <Badge text="Unstable" variant="caution" /> |
| [Socket](https://effect-ts.github.io/effect/platform/Socket.ts.html)                                 | A module for socket-based communication.        | <Badge text="Unstable" variant="caution" /> |
| [Worker](https://effect-ts.github.io/effect/platform/Worker.ts.html)                                 | A module for running tasks in separate workers. | <Badge text="Unstable" variant="caution" /> |

For the most up-to-date documentation and details, please refer to the official [README](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/blob/main/packages/platform/README.md) of the package.

## Installation

To install the **beta** version:

<Tabs syncKey="package-manager">

<TabItem label="npm" icon="seti:npm">

```sh showLineNumbers=false
npm install @effect/platform
```

</TabItem>

<TabItem label="pnpm" icon="pnpm">

```sh showLineNumbers=false
pnpm add @effect/platform
```

</TabItem>

<TabItem label="Yarn" icon="yarn">

```sh showLineNumbers=false
yarn add @effect/platform
```

</TabItem>

<TabItem label="Bun" icon="bun">

```sh showLineNumbers=false
bun add @effect/platform
```

</TabItem>

<TabItem label="Deno" icon="deno">

```sh showLineNumbers=false
deno add npm:@effect/platform
```

</TabItem>

</Tabs>

## Getting Started with Cross-Platform Programming

Here's a basic example using the `Path` module to create a file path, which can run across different environments:

**Example** (Cross-Platform Path Handling)

```ts twoslash title="index.ts"
import { Path } from "@effect/platform"
import { Effect } from "effect"

const program = Effect.gen(function* () {
  // Access the Path service
  const path = yield* Path.Path

  // Join parts of a path to create a complete file path
  const mypath = path.join("tmp", "file.txt")

  console.log(mypath)
})
```

### Running the Program in Node.js or Deno

First, install the Node.js-specific package:

<Tabs syncKey="package-manager">

<TabItem label="npm" icon="seti:npm">

```sh showLineNumbers=false
npm install @effect/platform-node
```

</TabItem>

<TabItem label="pnpm" icon="pnpm">

```sh showLineNumbers=false
pnpm add @effect/platform-node
```

</TabItem>

<TabItem label="Yarn" icon="yarn">

```sh showLineNumbers=false
yarn add @effect/platform-node
```

</TabItem>

<TabItem label="Deno" icon="deno">

```sh showLineNumbers=false
deno add npm:@effect/platform-node
```

</TabItem>

</Tabs>

Update the program to load the Node.js-specific context:

**Example** (Providing Node.js Context)

```ts twoslash title="index.ts" ins={3,15}
import { Path } from "@effect/platform"
import { Effect } from "effect"
import { NodeContext, NodeRuntime } from "@effect/platform-node"

const program = Effect.gen(function* () {
  // Access the Path service
  const path = yield* Path.Path

  // Join parts of a path to create a complete file path
  const mypath = path.join("tmp", "file.txt")

  console.log(mypath)
})

NodeRuntime.runMain(program.pipe(Effect.provide(NodeContext.layer)))
```

Finally, run the program in Node.js using `tsx`, or directly in Deno:

<Tabs syncKey="package-manager">

<TabItem label="npm" icon="seti:npm">

```sh showLineNumbers=false
npx tsx index.ts
# Output: tmp/file.txt
```

</TabItem>

<TabItem label="pnpm" icon="pnpm">

```sh showLineNumbers=false
pnpm dlx tsx index.ts
# Output: tmp/file.txt
```

</TabItem>

<TabItem label="Yarn" icon="seti:yarn">

```sh showLineNumbers=false
yarn dlx tsx index.ts
# Output: tmp/file.txt
```

</TabItem>

<TabItem label="Deno" icon="deno">

```sh showLineNumbers=false
deno run index.ts
# Output: tmp/file.txt

# or

deno run -RE index.ts
# Output: tmp/file.txt
# (granting required Read and Environment permissions without being prompted)
```

</TabItem>

</Tabs>

### Running the Program in Bun

To run the same program in Bun, first install the Bun-specific package:

```sh showLineNumbers=false
bun add @effect/platform-bun
```

Update the program to use the Bun-specific context:

**Example** (Providing Bun Context)

```ts twoslash title="index.ts" ins={3,15}
import { Path } from "@effect/platform"
import { Effect } from "effect"
import { BunContext, BunRuntime } from "@effect/platform-bun"

const program = Effect.gen(function* () {
  // Access the Path service
  const path = yield* Path.Path

  // Join parts of a path to create a complete file path
  const mypath = path.join("tmp", "file.txt")

  console.log(mypath)
})

BunRuntime.runMain(program.pipe(Effect.provide(BunContext.layer)))
```

Run the program in Bun:

```sh showLineNumbers=false
bun index.ts
tmp/file.txt
```
