content/docs/400-guides/600-state-management/200-synchronizedref.mdx, before:

---
title: SynchronizedRef
excerpt: Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet, consetetur sadipscing elitr, sed diam nonumy eirmod tempor invidunt ut labore.
bottomNavigation: pagination
---

`SynchronizedRef<A>` serves as a **mutable reference** to a value of type `A`. With it, we can store **immutable** data and perform updates **atomically and effectfully**.

<Info>
  Most of the operations for `SynchronizedRef` are similar to those of `Ref`.
  If you're not already familiar with `Ref`, it's recommended to read about
  [`Ref`](ref) first.
</Info>

The distinctive function in `SynchronizedRef` is `updateEffect`. This function takes an **effectful operation** and executes it to modify the shared state. This is the key feature setting `SynchronizedRef` apart from `Ref`.

```ts twoslash
import { Effect, SynchronizedRef } from "effect"

const program = Effect.gen(function* (_) {
  const ref = yield* _(SynchronizedRef.make("current"))
  // Simulating an effectful update operation
  const updateEffect = Effect.succeed("update")
  yield* _(SynchronizedRef.updateEffect(ref, () => updateEffect))
  const value = yield* _(SynchronizedRef.get(ref))
  return value
})

Effect.runPromise(program).then(console.log)
/*
Output:
update
*/
```

In real-world applications, there are scenarios where we need to execute an effect (e.g., querying a database) and then update the shared state accordingly. This is where `SynchronizedRef` shines, allowing us to update shared state in an actor-model fashion. We have a shared mutable state, but for each distinct command or message, we want to execute our effect and update the state.

We can pass an effectful program into every single update. All of these updates will be performed in parallel, but the results will be sequenced in such a way that they only affect the state at different times, resulting in a consistent state at the end.

In the following example, we send a `getAge` request for each user, updating the state accordingly:

```ts twoslash
import { Effect, SynchronizedRef } from "effect"

// Simulate API
const getAge = (userId: number) =>
  Effect.succeed({ userId, age: userId * 10 })

const users = [1, 2, 3, 4]

const meanAge = Effect.gen(function* (_) {
  const ref = yield* _(SynchronizedRef.make(0))

  const log = <R, E, A>(label: string, effect: Effect.Effect<R, E, A>) =>
    Effect.gen(function* (_) {
      const value = yield* _(SynchronizedRef.get(ref))
      yield* _(Effect.log(`${label} get: ${value}`))
      return yield* _(effect)
    })

  const task = (id: number) =>
    log(
      `task ${id}`,
      SynchronizedRef.updateEffect(ref, (sumOfAges) =>
        Effect.gen(function* (_) {
          const user = yield* _(getAge(id))
          return sumOfAges + user.age
        })
      )
    )

  yield* _(
    task(1).pipe(
      Effect.zip(task(2), { concurrent: true }),
      Effect.zip(task(3), { concurrent: true }),
      Effect.zip(task(4), { concurrent: true })
    )
  )

  const value = yield* _(SynchronizedRef.get(ref))
  return value / users.length
})

Effect.runPromise(meanAge).then(console.log)
/*
Output:
... fiber=#1 message="task 4 get: 0"
... fiber=#2 message="task 3 get: 40"
... fiber=#3 message="task 1 get: 70"
... fiber=#4 message="task 2 get: 80"
25
*/
```

Commit message:

replace excerpt placeholders with actual content (index pages excluded) (#424)

content/docs/400-guides/600-state-management/200-synchronizedref.mdx, after:

---
title: SynchronizedRef
excerpt: Discover the power of `SynchronizedRef` in Effect, a mutable reference enabling the atomic and effectful update of shared state. Building on the foundation of `Ref`, `SynchronizedRef` introduces the unique `updateEffect` function, allowing execution of effectful operations to modify the shared state. Dive into practical examples demonstrating the distinct capabilities of `SynchronizedRef`, such as parallel updates with consistent sequencing and real-world scenarios involving API requests and state updates. Elevate your understanding of concurrent state management with this advanced feature in Effect programming.
bottomNavigation: pagination
---

`SynchronizedRef<A>` serves as a **mutable reference** to a value of type `A`. With it, we can store **immutable** data and perform updates **atomically and effectfully**.

<Info>
  Most of the operations for `SynchronizedRef` are similar to those of `Ref`.
  If you're not already familiar with `Ref`, it's recommended to read about
  [`Ref`](ref) first.
</Info>

The distinctive function in `SynchronizedRef` is `updateEffect`. This function takes an **effectful operation** and executes it to modify the shared state. This is the key feature setting `SynchronizedRef` apart from `Ref`.

```ts twoslash
import { Effect, SynchronizedRef } from "effect"

const program = Effect.gen(function* (_) {
  const ref = yield* _(SynchronizedRef.make("current"))
  // Simulating an effectful update operation
  const updateEffect = Effect.succeed("update")
  yield* _(SynchronizedRef.updateEffect(ref, () => updateEffect))
  const value = yield* _(SynchronizedRef.get(ref))
  return value
})

Effect.runPromise(program).then(console.log)
/*
Output:
update
*/
```

In real-world applications, there are scenarios where we need to execute an effect (e.g., querying a database) and then update the shared state accordingly. This is where `SynchronizedRef` shines, allowing us to update shared state in an actor-model fashion. We have a shared mutable state, but for each distinct command or message, we want to execute our effect and update the state.

We can pass an effectful program into every single update. All of these updates will be performed in parallel, but the results will be sequenced in such a way that they only affect the state at different times, resulting in a consistent state at the end.

In the following example, we send a `getAge` request for each user, updating the state accordingly:

```ts twoslash
import { Effect, SynchronizedRef } from "effect"

// Simulate API
const getAge = (userId: number) =>
  Effect.succeed({ userId, age: userId * 10 })

const users = [1, 2, 3, 4]

const meanAge = Effect.gen(function* (_) {
  const ref = yield* _(SynchronizedRef.make(0))

  const log = <R, E, A>(label: string, effect: Effect.Effect<R, E, A>) =>
    Effect.gen(function* (_) {
      const value = yield* _(SynchronizedRef.get(ref))
      yield* _(Effect.log(`${label} get: ${value}`))
      return yield* _(effect)
    })

  const task = (id: number) =>
    log(
      `task ${id}`,
      SynchronizedRef.updateEffect(ref, (sumOfAges) =>
        Effect.gen(function* (_) {
          const user = yield* _(getAge(id))
          return sumOfAges + user.age
        })
      )
    )

  yield* _(
    task(1).pipe(
      Effect.zip(task(2), { concurrent: true }),
      Effect.zip(task(3), { concurrent: true }),
      Effect.zip(task(4), { concurrent: true })
    )
  )

  const value = yield* _(SynchronizedRef.get(ref))
  return value / users.length
})

Effect.runPromise(meanAge).then(console.log)
/*
Output:
... fiber=#1 message="task 4 get: 0"
... fiber=#2 message="task 3 get: 40"
... fiber=#3 message="task 1 get: 70"
... fiber=#4 message="task 2 get: 80"
25
*/
```
