content/docs/500-integrations/100-express.mdx, before:

---
title: Express Integration
navTitle: Express
excerpt: Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet, consetetur sadipscing elitr, sed diam nonumy eirmod tempor invidunt ut labore.
bottomNavigation: pagination
---

In this guide, we'll explore how to integrate Effect with [Express](https://expressjs.com/), a popular web framework for Node.js.

## Hello World Example

Let's start with a simple example that creates an Express server responding with "Hello World!" for requests to the root URL (/).
This mirrors the classic ["Hello world example"](https://expressjs.com/en/starter/hello-world.html) found in the Express documentation.

### Setup Steps

1. Create a new directory for your project and navigate to it using your terminal:

   ```bash filename="Terminal"
   mkdir express-effect-integration
   cd express-effect-integration
   ```

2. Initialize your project with npm. This will create a `package.json` file:

   ```bash filename="Terminal"
   npm init -y
   ```

3. Install the necessary dependencies:

   ```bash filename="Terminal"
   npm install effect express
   ```

   Install the necessary dev dependencies:

   ```bash filename="Terminal"
   npm install typescript @types/express --save-dev
   ```

   Now, initialize TypeScript:

   ```bash filename="Terminal"
   npx tsc --init
   ```

4. Create a new file, for example, `hello-world.ts`, and add the following code:

   ```ts filename="hello-world.ts" twoslash
   import { Context, Layer, Effect, Runtime } from "effect"
   import express from "express"

   // Define Express as a service
   const Express = Context.Tag<ReturnType<typeof express>>()

   // Define the main route, IndexRouteLive, as a Layer
   const IndexRouteLive = Layer.effectDiscard(
     Effect.gen(function* (_) {
       const app = yield* _(Express)
       const runFork = Runtime.runFork(yield* _(Effect.runtime<never>()))

       app.get("/", (_, res) => {
         runFork(Effect.sync(() => res.send("Hello World!")))
       })
     })
   )

   // Server Setup
   const ServerLive = Layer.scopedDiscard(
     Effect.gen(function* (_) {
       const port = 3001
       const app = yield* _(Express)
       yield* _(
         Effect.acquireRelease(
           Effect.sync(() =>
             app.listen(port, () =>
               console.log(`Example app listening on port ${port}`)
             )
           ),
           (server) => Effect.sync(() => server.close())
         )
       )
     })
   )

   // Setting Up Express
   const ExpressLive = Layer.sync(Express, () => express())

   // Combine the layers
   const AppLive = ServerLive.pipe(
     Layer.provide(IndexRouteLive),
     Layer.provide(ExpressLive)
   )

   // Run the program
   Effect.runFork(Layer.launch(AppLive))
   ```

5. Run your Express server. If you have [`ts-node`](https://github.com/TypeStrong/ts-node) installed, run the following command in the terminal:

   ```bash filename="Terminal"
   ts-node hello-world.ts
   ```

   Visit [http://localhost:3001](http://localhost:3001) in your web browser, and you should see "Hello World!".

### Code Breakdown

Here's a breakdown of what's happening:

- **Express Service**. We define an `Express` [service](context-management/services.mdx) to retrieve the Express app later on.

  ```ts
  // Define Express as a service
  const Express = Context.Tag<ReturnType<typeof express>>()
  ```

- **Main Route**. The main route, `IndexRouteLive`, is defined as a [Layer](context-management/layers.mdx).

  ```ts
  // Define the main route, IndexRouteLive, as a Layer
  const IndexRouteLive = Layer.effectDiscard(
    Effect.gen(function* (_) {
      const app = yield* _(Express)
      const runFork = Runtime.runFork(yield* _(Effect.runtime<never>()))

      app.get("/", (_, res) => {
        runFork(Effect.sync(() => res.send("Hello World!")))
      })
    })
  )
  ```

  We access the [runtime](runtime.mdx) (`Effect.runtime`), which can be used to execute tasks within our route (`runFork`).
  Since we don't need to produce any service in the output, we use `Layer.effectDiscard` to discard its output.

- **Server Setup**. The server is created in a layer (`ServerLive`) and mounted at the end of our program.

  ```ts
  // Server Setup
  const ServerLive = Layer.scopedDiscard(
    Effect.gen(function* (_) {
      const port = 3001
      const app = yield* _(Express)
      yield* _(
        Effect.acquireRelease(
          Effect.sync(() =>
            app.listen(port, () =>
              console.log(`Example app listening on port ${port}`)
            )
          ),
          (server) => Effect.sync(() => server.close())
        )
      )
    })
  )
  ```

  We use [`Effect.acquireRelease`](resource-management.mdx#defining-resources) to create the server, allowing automatic management of the [scope](resource-management.mdx#scope).
  Again, as we don't need to produce any service in the output, we use `Layer.scopedDiscard` to discard its output.

- **Mounting**. Finally, we mount the server by adding our route

  ```ts {1}
  const AppLive = ServerLive.pipe(
    Layer.provide(IndexRouteLive),
    Layer.provide(ExpressLive)
  )
  ```

  and providing the necessary dependency to the Express app

  ```ts {0,5}
  const ExpressLive = Layer.sync(Express, () => express())

  // Combine the layers
  const AppLive = ServerLive.pipe(
    Layer.provide(IndexRouteLive),
    Layer.provide(ExpressLive)
  )
  ```

## Basic routing

In this example, we'll explore the basics of routing with Effect and Express. The goal is to create a simple web server with two routes: one that returns all todos and another that returns a todo by its ID.

```ts filename="basic-routing.ts"
import { Context, Layer, Effect, Runtime } from "effect"
import express from "express"

// Define Express as a service
const Express = Context.Tag<ReturnType<typeof express>>()

interface Todo {
  readonly id: number
  readonly title: string
  readonly completed: boolean
}

// Define a interface with methods to get all todos and a todo by ID
interface TodoRepository {
  readonly getTodos: Effect.Effect<never, never, Array<Todo>>
  readonly getTodo: (id: number) => Effect.Effect<never, never, Todo | null>
}

// Define the repository as a service
const TodoRepository = Context.Tag<TodoRepository>()

// Define a main route that returns all Todos
const IndexRouteLive = Layer.effectDiscard(
  Effect.gen(function* (_) {
    const app = yield* _(Express)
    const runFork = Runtime.runFork(
      yield* _(Effect.runtime<TodoRepository>())
    )

    app.get("/", (_, res) => {
      runFork(
        Effect.gen(function* (_) {
          const repo = yield* _(TodoRepository)
          const todos = yield* _(repo.getTodos)
          res.json(todos)
        })
      )
    })
  })
)

// Define a route that returns a Todo by its ID
const TodoByIdRouteLive = Layer.effectDiscard(
  Effect.gen(function* (_) {
    const app = yield* _(Express)
    const runFork = Runtime.runFork(
      yield* _(Effect.runtime<TodoRepository>())
    )

    app.get("/todo/:id", (req, res) => {
      const id = req.params.id
      runFork(
        Effect.gen(function* (_) {
          const repo = yield* _(TodoRepository)
          const todo = yield* _(repo.getTodo(Number(id)))
          res.json(todo)
        })
      )
    })
  })
)

// Server Setup
const ServerLive = Layer.scopedDiscard(
  Effect.gen(function* (_) {
    const port = 3001
    const app = yield* _(Express)
    yield* _(
      Effect.acquireRelease(
        Effect.sync(() =>
          app.listen(port, () =>
            console.log(`Example app listening on port ${port}`)
          )
        ),
        (server) => Effect.sync(() => server.close())
      )
    )
  })
)

// Setting Up Express
const ExpressLive = Layer.sync(Express, () => express())

// Merge routes into a single layer
const RouterLive = Layer.mergeAll(IndexRouteLive, TodoByIdRouteLive)

// Combine all layers to create the final application layer
const AppLive = ServerLive.pipe(
  Layer.provide(RouterLive),
  Layer.provide(ExpressLive)
)

// Test Data for TodoRepository
const testData = [
  {
    id: 1,
    title: "delectus aut autem",
    completed: false
  },
  {
    id: 2,
    title: "quis ut nam facilis et officia qui",
    completed: false
  },
  {
    id: 3,
    title: "fugiat veniam minus",
    completed: false
  }
]

// Create a layer with test data
const TodoRepositoryTest = Layer.succeed(TodoRepository, {
  getTodos: Effect.succeed(testData),
  getTodo: (id) =>
    Effect.succeed(testData.find((todo) => todo.id === id) || null)
})

const Test = AppLive.pipe(Layer.provide(TodoRepositoryTest))

Effect.runFork(Layer.launch(Test))
```

Commit message:

replace excerpt placeholders with actual content (index pages excluded)

content/docs/500-integrations/100-express.mdx, after:

---
title: Express Integration
navTitle: Express
excerpt: Explore integrating Effect with Express, a popular Node.js web framework. Learn to create a simple Express server with "Hello World!" response and understand basic routing with Effect and Express. Follow the guide to set up, run, and breakdown the provided examples.
bottomNavigation: pagination
---

In this guide, we'll explore how to integrate Effect with [Express](https://expressjs.com/), a popular web framework for Node.js.

## Hello World Example

Let's start with a simple example that creates an Express server responding with "Hello World!" for requests to the root URL (/).
This mirrors the classic ["Hello world example"](https://expressjs.com/en/starter/hello-world.html) found in the Express documentation.

### Setup Steps

1. Create a new directory for your project and navigate to it using your terminal:

   ```bash filename="Terminal"
   mkdir express-effect-integration
   cd express-effect-integration
   ```

2. Initialize your project with npm. This will create a `package.json` file:

   ```bash filename="Terminal"
   npm init -y
   ```

3. Install the necessary dependencies:

   ```bash filename="Terminal"
   npm install effect express
   ```

   Install the necessary dev dependencies:

   ```bash filename="Terminal"
   npm install typescript @types/express --save-dev
   ```

   Now, initialize TypeScript:

   ```bash filename="Terminal"
   npx tsc --init
   ```

4. Create a new file, for example, `hello-world.ts`, and add the following code:

   ```ts filename="hello-world.ts" twoslash
   import { Context, Layer, Effect, Runtime } from "effect"
   import express from "express"

   // Define Express as a service
   const Express = Context.Tag<ReturnType<typeof express>>()

   // Define the main route, IndexRouteLive, as a Layer
   const IndexRouteLive = Layer.effectDiscard(
     Effect.gen(function* (_) {
       const app = yield* _(Express)
       const runFork = Runtime.runFork(yield* _(Effect.runtime<never>()))

       app.get("/", (_, res) => {
         runFork(Effect.sync(() => res.send("Hello World!")))
       })
     })
   )

   // Server Setup
   const ServerLive = Layer.scopedDiscard(
     Effect.gen(function* (_) {
       const port = 3001
       const app = yield* _(Express)
       yield* _(
         Effect.acquireRelease(
           Effect.sync(() =>
             app.listen(port, () =>
               console.log(`Example app listening on port ${port}`)
             )
           ),
           (server) => Effect.sync(() => server.close())
         )
       )
     })
   )

   // Setting Up Express
   const ExpressLive = Layer.sync(Express, () => express())

   // Combine the layers
   const AppLive = ServerLive.pipe(
     Layer.provide(IndexRouteLive),
     Layer.provide(ExpressLive)
   )

   // Run the program
   Effect.runFork(Layer.launch(AppLive))
   ```

5. Run your Express server. If you have [`ts-node`](https://github.com/TypeStrong/ts-node) installed, run the following command in the terminal:

   ```bash filename="Terminal"
   ts-node hello-world.ts
   ```

   Visit [http://localhost:3001](http://localhost:3001) in your web browser, and you should see "Hello World!".

### Code Breakdown

Here's a breakdown of what's happening:

- **Express Service**. We define an `Express` [service](context-management/services.mdx) to retrieve the Express app later on.

  ```ts
  // Define Express as a service
  const Express = Context.Tag<ReturnType<typeof express>>()
  ```

- **Main Route**. The main route, `IndexRouteLive`, is defined as a [Layer](context-management/layers.mdx).

  ```ts
  // Define the main route, IndexRouteLive, as a Layer
  const IndexRouteLive = Layer.effectDiscard(
    Effect.gen(function* (_) {
      const app = yield* _(Express)
      const runFork = Runtime.runFork(yield* _(Effect.runtime<never>()))

      app.get("/", (_, res) => {
        runFork(Effect.sync(() => res.send("Hello World!")))
      })
    })
  )
  ```

  We access the [runtime](runtime.mdx) (`Effect.runtime`), which can be used to execute tasks within our route (`runFork`).
  Since we don't need to produce any service in the output, we use `Layer.effectDiscard` to discard its output.

- **Server Setup**. The server is created in a layer (`ServerLive`) and mounted at the end of our program.

  ```ts
  // Server Setup
  const ServerLive = Layer.scopedDiscard(
    Effect.gen(function* (_) {
      const port = 3001
      const app = yield* _(Express)
      yield* _(
        Effect.acquireRelease(
          Effect.sync(() =>
            app.listen(port, () =>
              console.log(`Example app listening on port ${port}`)
            )
          ),
          (server) => Effect.sync(() => server.close())
        )
      )
    })
  )
  ```

  We use [`Effect.acquireRelease`](resource-management.mdx#defining-resources) to create the server, allowing automatic management of the [scope](resource-management.mdx#scope).
  Again, as we don't need to produce any service in the output, we use `Layer.scopedDiscard` to discard its output.

- **Mounting**. Finally, we mount the server by adding our route

  ```ts {1}
  const AppLive = ServerLive.pipe(
    Layer.provide(IndexRouteLive),
    Layer.provide(ExpressLive)
  )
  ```

  and providing the necessary dependency to the Express app

  ```ts {0,5}
  const ExpressLive = Layer.sync(Express, () => express())

  // Combine the layers
  const AppLive = ServerLive.pipe(
    Layer.provide(IndexRouteLive),
    Layer.provide(ExpressLive)
  )
  ```

## Basic routing

In this example, we'll explore the basics of routing with Effect and Express. The goal is to create a simple web server with two routes: one that returns all todos and another that returns a todo by its ID.

```ts filename="basic-routing.ts"
import { Context, Layer, Effect, Runtime } from "effect"
import express from "express"

// Define Express as a service
const Express = Context.Tag<ReturnType<typeof express>>()

interface Todo {
  readonly id: number
  readonly title: string
  readonly completed: boolean
}

// Define a interface with methods to get all todos and a todo by ID
interface TodoRepository {
  readonly getTodos: Effect.Effect<never, never, Array<Todo>>
  readonly getTodo: (id: number) => Effect.Effect<never, never, Todo | null>
}

// Define the repository as a service
const TodoRepository = Context.Tag<TodoRepository>()

// Define a main route that returns all Todos
const IndexRouteLive = Layer.effectDiscard(
  Effect.gen(function* (_) {
    const app = yield* _(Express)
    const runFork = Runtime.runFork(
      yield* _(Effect.runtime<TodoRepository>())
    )

    app.get("/", (_, res) => {
      runFork(
        Effect.gen(function* (_) {
          const repo = yield* _(TodoRepository)
          const todos = yield* _(repo.getTodos)
          res.json(todos)
        })
      )
    })
  })
)

// Define a route that returns a Todo by its ID
const TodoByIdRouteLive = Layer.effectDiscard(
  Effect.gen(function* (_) {
    const app = yield* _(Express)
    const runFork = Runtime.runFork(
      yield* _(Effect.runtime<TodoRepository>())
    )

    app.get("/todo/:id", (req, res) => {
      const id = req.params.id
      runFork(
        Effect.gen(function* (_) {
          const repo = yield* _(TodoRepository)
          const todo = yield* _(repo.getTodo(Number(id)))
          res.json(todo)
        })
      )
    })
  })
)

// Server Setup
const ServerLive = Layer.scopedDiscard(
  Effect.gen(function* (_) {
    const port = 3001
    const app = yield* _(Express)
    yield* _(
      Effect.acquireRelease(
        Effect.sync(() =>
          app.listen(port, () =>
            console.log(`Example app listening on port ${port}`)
          )
        ),
        (server) => Effect.sync(() => server.close())
      )
    )
  })
)

// Setting Up Express
const ExpressLive = Layer.sync(Express, () => express())

// Merge routes into a single layer
const RouterLive = Layer.mergeAll(IndexRouteLive, TodoByIdRouteLive)

// Combine all layers to create the final application layer
const AppLive = ServerLive.pipe(
  Layer.provide(RouterLive),
  Layer.provide(ExpressLive)
)

// Test Data for TodoRepository
const testData = [
  {
    id: 1,
    title: "delectus aut autem",
    completed: false
  },
  {
    id: 2,
    title: "quis ut nam facilis et officia qui",
    completed: false
  },
  {
    id: 3,
    title: "fugiat veniam minus",
    completed: false
  }
]

// Create a layer with test data
const TodoRepositoryTest = Layer.succeed(TodoRepository, {
  getTodos: Effect.succeed(testData),
  getTodo: (id) =>
    Effect.succeed(testData.find((todo) => todo.id === id) || null)
})

const Test = AppLive.pipe(Layer.provide(TodoRepositoryTest))

Effect.runFork(Layer.launch(Test))
```
