content/blog/0009-this-week-in-effect-2024-03-15.mdx, before:

---
title: This Week in Effect - 2024-03-15
excerpt: This Week in Effect is a weekly blog post that makes a summary of what happened in the Effect Community and Ecosystem to help you keep track of all the news, features and changes!
date: 2024-03-15
authors:
  - name: Davide Scognamiglio
    description: Project Manager
    avatar: https://pbs.twimg.com/profile_images/1329959878476111875/evHG8VX6_400x400.jpg
    twitter: https://twitter.com/DadeSkoTV
  - name: Mirela Prifti
    description: Community Manager
    avatar: https://pbs.twimg.com/profile_images/1728403785024770048/frKphayT_400x400.jpg
    twitter: https://twitter.com/mirepri4
  - name: Michael Arnaldi
    description: Chief Executive Officer
    avatar: https://pbs.twimg.com/profile_images/1232338149340319751/Ln9nNWyk_400x400.jpg
    twitter: https://twitter.com/MichaelArnaldi
relatedPosts:
  - this-week-in-effect-2024-03-08
  - this-week-in-effect-2024-03-22
---

Hi Effecters! 

Welcome back to a **T**his **W**eek **I**n **E**ffect (**TWIE**), our weekly update that aims to help you keep track of everything that is going on inside our Community and the Effect Ecosystem.

If it’s your first time here, Effect is a powerful TypeScript library designed to help developers create complex, synchronous, and asynchronous programs. One of the key features that sets Effect apart is how it leverages structured concurrency to provide features such as async cancellation and safe resource management, making it easier to build robust, scalable, and efficient programs.

To get started, below you’ll find our quick-start guide and documentation that will be your first step in your Effect journey. Enjoy!

[Effect quick-start guide](/docs/quickstart)

[Effect docs](/docs/introduction)

## Overview of TWIE

If you're new to TWIE, here are a few words on what TWIE is and what it aims for.

We’re happy to see the community growing so fast, with more and more people adopting Effect. At the same time, we understand that it might not be easy keeping up with everything that is going on in the Effect Ecosystem:

- Our Discord server reached **2050+ members** a few days ago and the engagement is at an all-time high.
- We just had our very first **[Effect Days Conference](/events/effect-days)** in Vienna on February 23, 2024. It's been an amazing experience connecting with our community in person. If you couldn't join us in Vienna, we've got plenty of exciting updates and content coming your way, so stay tuned!
- All projects around Effect are receiving **key updates** and there has been a lot of activity on GitHub!

We want to make it easy for you to find all the info you need to fully enjoy your Effect journey and actively engage with our community!

**And, that’s why we created TWIE** – a weekly update to inform you about key events about Effect in the previous week, both from the community (Discord discussions, X posts, YouTube content, etc.) and from a technical standpoint.

Now, back to business!

## Technology

Below you may find the list of all changes that occurred the last week.

### Effect Core
+ [Allow duration inputs to be singular](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2263) (Feature, next-minor)
+ [Tap and andThen fallthrough function](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2264) (Bug Fix, next-minor)
+ [Add Logger batching and structured logging](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2270) (Feature, next-minor)
+ [Add ManagedRuntime module, to make incremental adoption easier](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2211) (Feature)
+ [Added support for PromiseLike](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2280) (Feature)
+ [Add support for AbortSignal's to runPromise](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2285) (Feature)
+ [Performance improvements for RequestResolver](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2288) (Improvement)
+ [Add AbortSignal support to ManagedRuntime](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2293) (Feature)

### Effect Experimental
+ [Add WebSocket support to /platform http server](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2261) (Feature, next-minor)
+ [Improve Persistence error messages](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2274) (Improvement, next-minor)
+ [Schema: next minor](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2172) (Refactor, Breaking Change, next-minor)

### Effect Platform
+ [Add WebSocket support to /platform http server](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2261) (Feature, next-minor)
+ [Propogate Socket handler errors to .run Effect](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2267) (Feature, next-minor)
+ [Add PlatformLogger module](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2269) (Feature, next-minor)
+ [Remove log.txt](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2272) (Documentation Update, next-minor)
+ [Fix /platform docgen](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2272) (Bug Fix, next-minor)
+ [Improve /platform error messages](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2276) (Improvement)
+ [Schema: next minor](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2172) (Refactor, Breaking Change, next-minor)
+ [Add OpenTimeout & CloseEvent to Sockets](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2281) (Feature)
+ [Add SocketCloseError with additional metadata](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2283) (Feature)
+ [Use Schema.declare for http multipart PersistedFile schema](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2284) (Refactor)
+ [Allow optional fields in http form schemas](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2286) (Feature)
+ [Add option to /platform runMain to disable error reporting](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2287) (Feature)

### Effect RPC
+ [Schema: next minor](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2172) (Refactor, Breaking Changes, next-minor)

### Effect Schema
+ [Uncurry sortedSet combinators](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2265) (Improvement, next-minor)
+ [Schema: next minor](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2172) (Refactor, Breaking Changes, next-minor)
+ [Refactor propertySignature and add propertySignatureAnnotations](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2282) (Refactor)
+ [Schema annotations interfaces have been refactored into a namespace Annotations](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2289) (Refactor)
+ [Move PropertySignatureAST to PropertySignature namespace](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2291) (Refactor)
+ [AST: expose the getTemplateLiteralRegExp API](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2292) (Improvement)
+ [Refactor pluck](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2294) (Refactor)
+ [Remove propertySignatureAnnotations](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2295) (Refactor)
+ [Add mutable API interface](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2297) (Feature)
+ [Rename headOr to headOrElse](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2298) (Refactor)
+ [Added Schema.sortedSet](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2241) (Feature, next-minor)

### General Chores
+ [Better changesets](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2279)


## Community

In the last week, we welcomed +50 new Effecters to our [Discord server](https://discord.gg/effect-ts)! Thank you to all our new members for joining the Effect community, and we're excited to have you on board!

### Content Update

For our french-speaking audience that may have missed last week's announcement: the first ever [Effect Paris Meetup](https://www.meetup.com/fr-FR/effect-paris/) will land in April! Thanks to [Evryg](https://www.evryg.com)'s team, [Antoine Coulon](https://twitter.com/c9antoine), and [Jean-Baptist Musso](https://twitter.com/jbmusso) for being the promoters of the event.
<Tweet id="1764621821184262629" />

The members of our community are the best when it comes to giving advice, explanations, and support. That's why we can only join [Stephan](https://twitter.com/stephaneledorze)'s advice:

<Tweet id="1766121534744125869" />

Given the positive feedback on our Conference Day recap, we're re-sharing it for those who may have missed out. 

<YouTube url="https://www.youtube.com/embed/CfbR-1XRlTA?si=hCRw4ORgro9w2wd1" />

There's plenty of news and content arriving, so don't forget to follow our [X account](https://twitter.com/EffectTS_) and [YouTube channel](https://www.youtube.com/@effect-ts) to stay updated!

## Closing Notes

That's all for this week. Thank you for being a vital part of our community. Your feedback is highly valued as we fine-tune this new format. Feel free to share your thoughts, and we'll do our best to tailor it to the needs of our community.

_The Effect Community Team_

Commit message:

Update 0009-this-week-in-effect-2024-03-15.mdx (#531)

content/blog/0009-this-week-in-effect-2024-03-15.mdx, after:

---
title: This Week in Effect - 2024-03-15
excerpt: Technical updates and the exciting announcement of the first-ever Effect Paris meetup in April!
date: 2024-03-15
authors:
  - name: Davide Scognamiglio
    description: Project Manager
    avatar: https://pbs.twimg.com/profile_images/1329959878476111875/evHG8VX6_400x400.jpg
    twitter: https://twitter.com/DadeSkoTV
  - name: Mirela Prifti
    description: Community Manager
    avatar: https://pbs.twimg.com/profile_images/1728403785024770048/frKphayT_400x400.jpg
    twitter: https://twitter.com/mirepri4
  - name: Michael Arnaldi
    description: Chief Executive Officer
    avatar: https://pbs.twimg.com/profile_images/1232338149340319751/Ln9nNWyk_400x400.jpg
    twitter: https://twitter.com/MichaelArnaldi
relatedPosts:
  - this-week-in-effect-2024-03-08
  - this-week-in-effect-2024-03-22
---

Hi Effecters! 

Welcome back to a **T**his **W**eek **I**n **E**ffect (**TWIE**), our weekly update that aims to help you keep track of everything that is going on inside our Community and the Effect Ecosystem.

If it’s your first time here, Effect is a powerful TypeScript library designed to help developers create complex, synchronous, and asynchronous programs. One of the key features that sets Effect apart is how it leverages structured concurrency to provide features such as async cancellation and safe resource management, making it easier to build robust, scalable, and efficient programs.

To get started, below you’ll find our quick-start guide and documentation that will be your first step in your Effect journey. Enjoy!

[Effect quick-start guide](/docs/quickstart)

[Effect docs](/docs/introduction)

## Overview of TWIE

If you're new to TWIE, here are a few words on what TWIE is and what it aims for.

We’re happy to see the community growing so fast, with more and more people adopting Effect. At the same time, we understand that it might not be easy keeping up with everything that is going on in the Effect Ecosystem:

- Our Discord server reached **2050+ members** a few days ago and the engagement is at an all-time high.
- We just had our very first **[Effect Days Conference](/events/effect-days)** in Vienna on February 23, 2024. It's been an amazing experience connecting with our community in person. If you couldn't join us in Vienna, we've got plenty of exciting updates and content coming your way, so stay tuned!
- All projects around Effect are receiving **key updates** and there has been a lot of activity on GitHub!

We want to make it easy for you to find all the info you need to fully enjoy your Effect journey and actively engage with our community!

**And, that’s why we created TWIE** – a weekly update to inform you about key events about Effect in the previous week, both from the community (Discord discussions, X posts, YouTube content, etc.) and from a technical standpoint.

Now, back to business!

## Technology

Below you may find the list of all changes that occurred last week.

### Effect Core
+ [Allow duration inputs to be singular](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2263) (Feature, next-minor)
+ [Tap and andThen fallthrough function](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2264) (Bug Fix, next-minor)
+ [Add Logger batching and structured logging](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2270) (Feature, next-minor)
+ [Add ManagedRuntime module, to make incremental adoption easier](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2211) (Feature)
+ [Added support for PromiseLike](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2280) (Feature)
+ [Add support for AbortSignal's to runPromise](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2285) (Feature)
+ [Performance improvements for RequestResolver](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2288) (Improvement)
+ [Add AbortSignal support to ManagedRuntime](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2293) (Feature)

### Effect Experimental
+ [Add WebSocket support to /platform http server](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2261) (Feature, next-minor)
+ [Improve Persistence error messages](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2274) (Improvement, next-minor)
+ [Schema: next minor](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2172) (Refactor, Breaking Change, next-minor)

### Effect Platform
+ [Add WebSocket support to /platform http server](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2261) (Feature, next-minor)
+ [Propogate Socket handler errors to .run Effect](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2267) (Feature, next-minor)
+ [Add PlatformLogger module](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2269) (Feature, next-minor)
+ [Remove log.txt](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2272) (Documentation Update, next-minor)
+ [Fix /platform docgen](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2272) (Bug Fix, next-minor)
+ [Improve /platform error messages](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2276) (Improvement)
+ [Schema: next minor](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2172) (Refactor, Breaking Change, next-minor)
+ [Add OpenTimeout & CloseEvent to Sockets](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2281) (Feature)
+ [Add SocketCloseError with additional metadata](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2283) (Feature)
+ [Use Schema.declare for http multipart PersistedFile schema](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2284) (Refactor)
+ [Allow optional fields in http form schemas](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2286) (Feature)
+ [Add option to /platform runMain to disable error reporting](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2287) (Feature)

### Effect RPC
+ [Schema: next minor](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2172) (Refactor, Breaking Changes, next-minor)

### Effect Schema
+ [Uncurry sortedSet combinators](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2265) (Improvement, next-minor)
+ [Schema: next minor](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2172) (Refactor, Breaking Changes, next-minor)
+ [Refactor propertySignature and add propertySignatureAnnotations](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2282) (Refactor)
+ [Schema annotations interfaces have been refactored into a namespace Annotations](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2289) (Refactor)
+ [Move PropertySignatureAST to PropertySignature namespace](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2291) (Refactor)
+ [AST: expose the getTemplateLiteralRegExp API](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2292) (Improvement)
+ [Refactor pluck](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2294) (Refactor)
+ [Remove propertySignatureAnnotations](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2295) (Refactor)
+ [Add mutable API interface](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2297) (Feature)
+ [Rename headOr to headOrElse](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2298) (Refactor)
+ [Added Schema.sortedSet](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2241) (Feature, next-minor)

### General Chores
+ [Better changesets](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2279)


## Community

In the last week, we welcomed +50 new Effecters to our [Discord server](https://discord.gg/effect-ts)! Thank you to all our new members for joining the Effect community, and we're excited to have you on board!

### Content Update

For our French-speaking audience that may have missed last week's announcement: the first ever [Effect Paris Meetup](https://www.meetup.com/fr-FR/effect-paris/) will land in April! Thanks to [Evryg](https://www.evryg.com) team, [Jean-Baptiste Musso](https://twitter.com/jbmusso) and [Antoine Coulon](https://twitter.com/c9antoine) for organizing the event.
<Tweet id="1764621821184262629" />

Our community members are the best when it comes to giving advice, explanations, and support. That's why we can only support [Stephan](https://twitter.com/stephaneledorze)'s advice:

<Tweet id="1766121534744125869" />

Given the positive feedback on our Conference Day recap, we're re-sharing it for those who may have missed it. 

<YouTube url="https://www.youtube.com/embed/CfbR-1XRlTA?si=hCRw4ORgro9w2wd1" />

There's plenty of news and content arriving, so don't forget to follow our [X account](https://twitter.com/EffectTS_) and [YouTube channel](https://www.youtube.com/@effect-ts) to stay updated!

## Closing Notes

That's all for this week. Thank you for being a vital part of our community. Your feedback is highly valued as we fine-tune this new format. Feel free to share your thoughts, and we'll do our best to tailor it to the needs of our community.

_The Effect Community Team_
