content/blog/0012-this-week-in-effect-2024-03-29.mdx, before:

---
title: This Week in Effect - 2024-03-22
excerpt: This Week in Effect is a weekly blog post that makes a summary of what happened in the Effect Community and Ecosystem to help you keep track of all the news, features and changes!
date: 2024-03-29
authors:
  - name: Davide Scognamiglio
    description: Project Manager
    avatar: https://pbs.twimg.com/profile_images/1329959878476111875/evHG8VX6_400x400.jpg
    twitter: https://twitter.com/DadeSkoTV
  - name: Mirela Prifti
    description: Community Manager
    avatar: https://pbs.twimg.com/profile_images/1728403785024770048/frKphayT_400x400.jpg
    twitter: https://twitter.com/mirepri4
  - name: Michael Arnaldi
    description: Chief Executive Officer
    avatar: https://pbs.twimg.com/profile_images/1232338149340319751/Ln9nNWyk_400x400.jpg
    twitter: https://twitter.com/MichaelArnaldi
relatedPosts:
  - this-week-in-effect-2024-03-15
---

Hi Effecters! 

Welcome back to a **T**his **W**eek **I**n **E**ffect (**TWIE**), our weekly update that aims to help you keep track of everything that is going on inside our Community and the Effect Ecosystem.

If it’s your first time here, Effect is a powerful TypeScript library designed to help developers create complex, synchronous, and asynchronous programs. One of the key features that sets Effect apart is how it leverages structured concurrency to provide features such as async cancellation and safe resource management, making it easier to build robust, scalable, and efficient programs.

To get started, below you’ll find our quick-start guide and documentation that will be your first step in your Effect journey. Enjoy!

[Effect quick-start guide](/docs/quickstart)

[Effect docs](/docs/introduction)

## Overview of TWIE

If you're new to TWIE, here are a few words on what TWIE is and what it aims for.

We’re happy to see the community growing so fast, with more and more people adopting Effect. At the same time, we understand that it might not be easy keeping up with everything that is going on in the Effect Ecosystem:

- Our Discord server reached **2130+ members** a few days ago and the engagement is at an all-time high.
- We just had our very first **[Effect Days Conference](/events/effect-days)** in Vienna on February 23, 2024. It's been an amazing experience connecting with our community in person. If you couldn't join us in Vienna, we've got plenty of exciting updates and content coming your way, so stay tuned!
- All projects around Effect are receiving **key updates** and there has been a lot of activity on GitHub!

We want to make it easy for you to find all the info you need to fully enjoy your Effect journey and actively engage with our community!

**And, that’s why we created TWIE** – a weekly update to inform you about key events about Effect in the previous week, both from the community (Discord discussions, X posts, YouTube content, etc.) and from a technical standpoint.

Now, back to business!

## Technology

Below you may find the list of all changes that occurred the last week.

### Effect Core
+ [Add Duration.subtract api](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2402) (Feature)
+ [Add BigInt.fromString and BigInt.fromNumber](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2399) (Feature)
+ [Fix interruption of parked requests](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2404) (Bug Fix)
+ [Collect exits on forEach interrupt of residual requests](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2416) (Bug Fix)
+ [Add Config duration](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2407) (Feature)

### Effect Vitest
+ [Fix helper signatures](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2394) (Bug Fix)

### Effect Printer
+ [Remove the Render module from printer](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2378) (Bug Fix, Feature)

### Effect Experimental
+ [Don't persist items with a TimeToLive of zero](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2421) (Bug Fix)

### Effect Platform
+ [Add Cookies module to /platform http](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2387) (Feature)
+ [Expose Schema ParseOptions in /platform schema apis](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2400) (Feature)
+ [Add set-cookie headers in Http.response.toWeb](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2403) (Feature)
+ [Readme: add HTTP Client section](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2405) (Documentation Update)
+ [Add undici http client to @effect/platform-node](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2410) (Feature)
+ [Fix broken imports in /platform](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2411) (Bug Fix)
+ [Make /platform ClientRequest implement Effect](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2413) (Feature)

### Effect Schema
+ [Fix Schema.extend with nested union](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2396) (Bug Fix)
+ [Extend should un-nest sub-unions](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2398) (Bug Fix)
+ [Use BigInt fromString and fromNumber for BigInt schemas](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2409) (Refactor)
+ [Update schema readme](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2422) (Documentation Update)
+ [Readme: pattern to simplify recursive schema definition](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2420) (Documentation Update)
+ [Readme: add guidelines for messages](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2423) (Documentation Update)
+ [Corrected the optional signature to exclude invalid options](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2424) (Bug Fix)
+ [Export null from the AST module](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2428) (Refactor)

## Community

In the last week, we welcomed +30 new Effecters to our [Discord server](https://discord.gg/effect-ts)! Thank you to all our new members for joining the Effect community, and we're excited to have you on board!

### Content Update

Let's review the key highlights of this week in our community.

We begin with a fantastic video by [Milad](https://www.youtube.com/@SignLanguageTech) in sign language. Thank you so much, Milad, for your dedication in promoting Effect to your audience! 

<YouTube url="https://www.youtube.com/embed/K30lWUYluI4?si=Xpa_UtYH0ggJGYiF" />

Moving on, we have fresh content straight from our Effect Days: presenting the testimonials of two workshop participants.

Laure Retru-Chavastel from **[inato](https://inato.com/)**:

<YouTube url="https://www.youtube.com/embed/X40nAhv4dY4?si=AY4LpQQkdcxnWQEr" />

and [Sandro Maglione](https://twitter.com/SandroMaglione):

<YouTube url="https://www.youtube.com/embed/Ebwu5h_xRk8?si=DVWzmMNSn15lLtOg" />

Just a reminder for our french-speaking audience: the first ever [Effect Paris Meetup](https://www.meetup.com/fr-FR/effect-paris/) will land in April! Thanks to [Evryg](https://www.evryg.com)'s team, [Antoine Coulon](https://twitter.com/c9antoine), and [Jean-Baptist Musso](https://twitter.com/jbmusso) for being the promoters of the event.
<Tweet id="1764621821184262629" />

There's plenty of news and content arriving, so don't forget to follow our [X account](https://twitter.com/EffectTS_) and [YouTube channel](https://www.youtube.com/@effect-ts) to stay updated!

## Closing Notes

That's all for this week. Thank you for being a vital part of our community. Your feedback is highly valued as we fine-tune this new format. Feel free to share your thoughts, and we'll do our best to tailor it to the needs of our community.

_The Effect Community Team_

Commit message:

Updated community and tech section. Added related post on TWIE_22_03_2024

content/blog/0012-this-week-in-effect-2024-03-29.mdx, after:

---
title: This Week in Effect - 2024-03-22
excerpt: This Week in Effect is a weekly blog post that makes a summary of what happened in the Effect Community and Ecosystem to help you keep track of all the news, features and changes!
date: 2024-03-29
authors:
  - name: Davide Scognamiglio
    description: Project Manager
    avatar: https://pbs.twimg.com/profile_images/1329959878476111875/evHG8VX6_400x400.jpg
    twitter: https://twitter.com/DadeSkoTV
  - name: Mirela Prifti
    description: Community Manager
    avatar: https://pbs.twimg.com/profile_images/1728403785024770048/frKphayT_400x400.jpg
    twitter: https://twitter.com/mirepri4
  - name: Michael Arnaldi
    description: Chief Executive Officer
    avatar: https://pbs.twimg.com/profile_images/1232338149340319751/Ln9nNWyk_400x400.jpg
    twitter: https://twitter.com/MichaelArnaldi
relatedPosts:
  - this-week-in-effect-2024-03-22
---

Hi Effecters! 

Welcome back to a **T**his **W**eek **I**n **E**ffect (**TWIE**), our weekly update that aims to help you keep track of everything that is going on inside our Community and the Effect Ecosystem.

If it’s your first time here, Effect is a powerful TypeScript library designed to help developers create complex, synchronous, and asynchronous programs. One of the key features that sets Effect apart is how it leverages structured concurrency to provide features such as async cancellation and safe resource management, making it easier to build robust, scalable, and efficient programs.

To get started, below you’ll find our quick-start guide and documentation that will be your first step in your Effect journey. Enjoy!

[Effect quick-start guide](/docs/quickstart)

[Effect docs](/docs/introduction)

## Overview of TWIE

If you're new to TWIE, here are a few words on what TWIE is and what it aims for.

We’re happy to see the community growing so fast, with more and more people adopting Effect. At the same time, we understand that it might not be easy keeping up with everything that is going on in the Effect Ecosystem:

- Our Discord server reached **2130+ members** a few days ago and the engagement is at an all-time high.
- We just had our very first **[Effect Days Conference](/events/effect-days)** in Vienna on February 23, 2024. It's been an amazing experience connecting with our community in person. If you couldn't join us in Vienna, we've got plenty of exciting updates and content coming your way, so stay tuned!
- All projects around Effect are receiving **key updates** and there has been a lot of activity on GitHub!

We want to make it easy for you to find all the info you need to fully enjoy your Effect journey and actively engage with our community!

**And, that’s why we created TWIE** – a weekly update to inform you about key events about Effect in the previous week, both from the community (Discord discussions, X posts, YouTube content, etc.) and from a technical standpoint.

Now, back to business!

## Technology

Below you may find the list of all changes that occurred the last week.

### Effect Core
+ [Add Duration.subtract api](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2402) (Feature)
+ [Add Duration.subtract api](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2402) (Feature)
+ [Add BigInt.fromString and BigInt.fromNumber](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2399) (Feature)
+ [Fix interruption of parked requests](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2404) (Bug Fix)
+ [Collect exits on forEach interrupt of residual requests](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2416) (Bug Fix)
+ [Add Config duration](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2407) (Feature)
+ [Add Config.duration](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2407) (Feature)


### Effect Vitest
+ [Fix helper signatures](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2394) (Bug Fix)


### Effect Printer
+ [Remove the Render module from printer](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2378) (Bug Fix, Feature)

### Effect Experimental
+ [Don't persist items with a TimeToLive of zero](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2421) (Bug Fix)

### Effect Platform
+ [Add Cookies module to /platform http](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2387) (Feature)
+ [Expose Schema ParseOptions in /platform schema apis](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2400) (Feature)
+ [Add set-cookie headers in Http.response.toWeb](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2403) (Feature)
+ [Readme: add HTTP Client section](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2405) (Documentation Update)
+ [Add undici http client to @effect/platform-node](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2410) (Feature)
+ [Fix broken imports in /platform](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2411) (Bug Fix)
+ [Make /platform ClientRequest implement Effect](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2413) (Feature)


### Effect Schema
+ [Fix Schema.extend with nested union](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2396) (Bug Fix)
+ [Extend should un-nest sub-unions](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2398) (Bug Fix)
+ [Use `bigint.{fromString,fromNumber}` for bigint schemas](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2409) (Refactor)
+ [Update schema readme](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2422) (Docuemntation Update)
+ [Readme: pattern to simplify recursive schema definition](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2420) (Documentation Update)
+ [Readme: add guidelines for messages](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2423) (Documentation Update)
+ [Corrected the optional signature to exclude invalid options](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2424) (Bug Fix)
+ [Export null from the AST module](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2428) (Refactor)
+ [Fix ts 5.4 build errors](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2439) (Bug Fix)


## Community

In the last week, we welcomed +75 new Effecters to our [Discord server](https://discord.gg/effect-ts)! Thank you to all our new members for joining the Effect community, and we're excited to have you on board!

### Content Update

Over the past few weeks, many of you have been asking, and the time has finally come! 

We've begun to release the talks from our speakers at the Effect Days Conference, and there's no better place to start than with [Johannes Schickling](https://twitter.com/schickling)'s outstanding Opening Keynote!
This video swiftly garnered massive attention on YouTube, and we're re-sharing it here for those who might have overlooked it:
<YouTube url="https://www.youtube.com/embed/PxIBWjiv3og?si=puGi9-EqtkLjrs5A" />

Remember, this is just the beginning! Stay tuned by following us on [YouTube](https://www.youtube.com/@effect-ts) and [X](https://twitter.com/EffectTS_) for more must-see content ahead.

Moving on, our Milad continued to lend support to our community this week with a video demonstrating how to sign 'Effect'. Thank you once again for your ongoing support, and if anyone has additional signs for 'Effect,' please share them by commenting on this post on X.

<Tweet id="1772209392928137337" />

Just a reminder for our french-speaking audience: the first ever [Effect Paris Meetup](https://www.meetup.com/fr-FR/effect-paris/) will land in April! Thanks to [Evryg](https://www.evryg.com)'s team, [Antoine Coulon](https://twitter.com/c9antoine), and [Jean-Baptist Musso](https://twitter.com/jbmusso) for being the promoters of the event.

<Tweet id="1764621821184262629" />

## Closing Notes

That's all for this week. Thank you for being a vital part of our community. Your feedback is highly valued as we fine-tune this new format. Feel free to share your thoughts, and we'll do our best to tailor it to the needs of our community.

_The Effect Community Team_
