content/blog/0015-this-week-in-effect-2024-04-12.mdx, before:

---
title: This Week in Effect - 2024-04-12
excerpt: Technical updates in Effect, "Effect's Latest and Greatest" talk by Tim Smart & Upcoming Event.
date: 2024-04-12
authors:
  - name: Davide Scognamiglio
    description: Project Manager
    avatar: https://pbs.twimg.com/profile_images/1329959878476111875/evHG8VX6_400x400.jpg
    twitter: https://twitter.com/DadeSkoTV
  - name: Mirela Prifti
    description: Community Manager
    avatar: https://pbs.twimg.com/profile_images/1728403785024770048/frKphayT_400x400.jpg
    twitter: https://twitter.com/mirepri4
  - name: Michael Arnaldi
    description: Chief Executive Officer
    avatar: https://pbs.twimg.com/profile_images/1232338149340319751/Ln9nNWyk_400x400.jpg
    twitter: https://twitter.com/MichaelArnaldi
relatedPosts:
  - this-week-in-effect-2024-04-05
---

Hi Effecters! 

Welcome back to a **T**his **W**eek **I**n **E**ffect (**TWIE**), our weekly update that aims to help you keep track of everything that is going on inside our Community and the Effect Ecosystem.

If it’s your first time here, Effect is a powerful TypeScript library designed to help developers create complex, synchronous, and asynchronous programs. One of the key features that sets Effect apart is how it leverages structured concurrency to provide features such as async cancellation and safe resource management, making it easier to build robust, scalable, and efficient programs.

To begin your Effect journey, take a look at our quick-start guide and documentation below. Enjoy!

[Effect quick-start guide](/docs/quickstart)

[Effect docs](/docs/introduction)

## Overview of TWIE

If you're new to TWIE, here are a few words on what TWIE is and what it aims for.

We’re happy to see the community growing so fast, with more and more people adopting Effect. At the same time, we understand that it might not be easy keeping up with everything that is going on in the Effect Ecosystem:

- Our Discord server reached **2200+ members** a few days ago and the engagement is at an all-time high.
- We just had our very first **[Effect Days Conference](/events/effect-days)** in Vienna on February 23, 2024. It's been an amazing experience connecting with our community in person. If you couldn't join us in Vienna, we've got plenty of exciting updates and content coming your way, so stay tuned!
- All projects around Effect are receiving **key updates** and there has been a lot of activity on GitHub!

We want to make it easy for you to find all the info you need to fully enjoy your Effect journey and actively engage with our community!

**And, that’s why we created TWIE** – a weekly update to inform you about key events about Effect in the previous week, both from the community (Discord discussions, X posts, YouTube content, etc.) and from a technical standpoint.

Now, back to business!

## Technology

Below you may find the list of all changes that occurred last week.

### Effect Core
+ [Added "Readable,Subscribable".unwrap](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2498) (Feature)
+ [Ensure FIFO ordering when a Deferred is resolved](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2499) (Bug Fix)
+ [Simplify scope internals](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2500) (Refactor)


### Effect Platform
+ [More support for strings in platform Socket](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2486) (Feature)
+ [Add string to platform ServerRequest.upgradeChannel](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2487) (Improvement)
+ [Add Readable & Subscribable modules](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2472) (Feature)
+ [Platform: readme: add "Obtaining Information About the Running Process" section](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2492) (Documentation Update)
+ [Make Http.middleware.withTracerDisabledWhen a Layer api](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2491) (Feature, next-minor)



### Effect Schema
+ [Schema: next minor](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2440) (Minor, Refactor)
+ [Fix eitherFromSelf description annotation](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2495) (Bug Fix)
+ [Fix exitFromSelf description annotation](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2496) (Bug Fix)

## Community

In the last week, we welcomed +25 new Effecters to our [Discord server](https://discord.gg/effect-ts)! Thank you to all our new members for joining the Effect community, and we're excited to have you on board!

### Content Update

Carrying on with our journey through the Effect Days Conference. 

Following the exceptional reception of last week's [Opening Keynote](https://www.youtube.com/watch?reload=9&v=PxIBWjiv3og), we have published another engaging talk from [Tim Smart](https://twitter.com/tim_smart), one of the Founding Engineers of [Effectful Technologies](https://www.effectful.co/). He uncovers the latest developments in the Effect Ecosystem, including the exciting new VSCode Extension.

<YouTube url="https://www.youtube.com/embed/v9lUg6zlaRM?si=vvMT0tfbqA0rK-vc" />

We encourage you to stay connected with us on [YouTube](https://www.youtube.com/@effect-ts) and [X](https://twitter.com/EffectTS_) to stay in the loop with upcoming content and to share your feedback with us.


Just a reminder for our French-speaking audience: the first ever [Effect Paris Meetup](https://www.meetup.com/fr-FR/effect-paris/) will land in April! Thanks to [Evryg](https://www.evryg.com) team, [Jean-Baptiste Musso](https://twitter.com/jbmusso) and [Antoine Coulon](https://twitter.com/c9antoine) for organizing the event.

<Tweet id="1764621821184262629" />

## Closing Notes

That's all for this week. Thank you for being a vital part of our community. Your feedback is highly valued as we fine-tune this new format. Feel free to share your thoughts, and we'll do our best to tailor it to the needs of our community.

_The Effect Community Team_

Commit message:

Updated Community and Tech Section and added related post to TWIE_2024_04_05

content/blog/0015-this-week-in-effect-2024-04-12.mdx, after:

---
title: This Week in Effect - 2024-04-12
excerpt: Technical updates in Effect, "Effect's Latest and Greatest" talk by Tim Smart & Upcoming Event.
date: 2024-04-12
authors:
  - name: Davide Scognamiglio
    description: Project Manager
    avatar: https://pbs.twimg.com/profile_images/1329959878476111875/evHG8VX6_400x400.jpg
    twitter: https://twitter.com/DadeSkoTV
  - name: Mirela Prifti
    description: Community Manager
    avatar: https://pbs.twimg.com/profile_images/1728403785024770048/frKphayT_400x400.jpg
    twitter: https://twitter.com/mirepri4
  - name: Michael Arnaldi
    description: Chief Executive Officer
    avatar: https://pbs.twimg.com/profile_images/1232338149340319751/Ln9nNWyk_400x400.jpg
    twitter: https://twitter.com/MichaelArnaldi
relatedPosts:
  - this-week-in-effect-2024-04-05
---

Hi Effecters! 

Welcome back to a **T**his **W**eek **I**n **E**ffect (**TWIE**), our weekly update that aims to help you keep track of everything that is going on inside our Community and the Effect Ecosystem.

If it’s your first time here, Effect is a powerful TypeScript library designed to help developers create complex, synchronous, and asynchronous programs. One of the key features that sets Effect apart is how it leverages structured concurrency to provide features such as async cancellation and safe resource management, making it easier to build robust, scalable, and efficient programs.

To begin your Effect journey, take a look at our quick-start guide and documentation below. Enjoy!

[Effect quick-start guide](/docs/quickstart)

[Effect docs](/docs/introduction)

## Overview of TWIE

If you're new to TWIE, here are a few words on what TWIE is and what it aims for.

We’re happy to see the community growing so fast, with more and more people adopting Effect. At the same time, we understand that it might not be easy keeping up with everything that is going on in the Effect Ecosystem:

- Our Discord server reached **2200+ members** a few days ago and the engagement is at an all-time high.
- We just had our very first **[Effect Days Conference](/events/effect-days)** in Vienna on February 23, 2024. It's been an amazing experience connecting with our community in person. If you couldn't join us in Vienna, we've got plenty of exciting updates and content coming your way, so stay tuned!
- All projects around Effect are receiving **key updates** and there has been a lot of activity on GitHub!

We want to make it easy for you to find all the info you need to fully enjoy your Effect journey and actively engage with our community!

**And, that’s why we created TWIE** – a weekly update to inform you about key events about Effect in the previous week, both from the community (Discord discussions, X posts, YouTube content, etc.) and from a technical standpoint.

Now, back to business!

## Technology

Below you may find the list of all changes that occurred last week.

### Effect Core
+ [Added "Readable,Subscribable".unwrap](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2498) (Feature)
+ [Ensure FIFO ordering when a Deferred is resolved](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2499) (Bug Fix)
+ [Simplify scope internals](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2500) (Refactor)
+ [Add Duration.divide](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2494) (Feature)
+ [Make tracing spans cheaper to construct](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2502) (Improvement)
+ [Centralize error messages for bugs](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2503) (Improvement)
+ [Add a RegExp module to packages/effect](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2493) (Feature)


### Effect Platform
+ [More support for strings in platform Socket](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2486) (Feature)
+ [Add string to platform ServerRequest.upgradeChannel](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2487) (Improvement)
+ [Add Readable & Subscribable modules](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2472) (Feature)
+ [Platform: readme: add "Obtaining Information About the Running Process" section](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2492) (Documentation Update)
+ [Make Http.middleware.withTracerDisabledWhen a Layer api](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2491) (Feature, next-minor)
+ [Use a FiberSet to run http server fibers](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2504) (Feature)



### Effect Schema
+ [Schema: next minor](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2440) (Minor, Refactor)
+ [Fix eitherFromSelf description annotation](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2495) (Bug Fix)
+ [Fix exitFromSelf description annotation](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2496) (Bug Fix)

## Community

In the last week, we welcomed +25 new Effecters to our [Discord server](https://discord.gg/effect-ts)! Thank you to all our new members for joining the Effect community, and we're excited to have you on board!

Before we dive into this week's content, we're delighted to announce the date of the first [Effect Paris Meetup](https://www.meetup.com/effect-paris/events/300307442/), hosted at the [Evryg](https://www.evryg.com) headquarters on 
**Tuesday, April 23, 2024, at 7 p.m. (local time)**. This event promises to be a must-attend for all French-speakin members of our community. Huge thanks to the Evryg team, [Jean-Baptiste Musso](https://twitter.com/jbmusso), and [Antoine Coulon](https://twitter.com/c9antoine) for championing this initiative!

<iframe src="https://www.linkedin.com/embed/feed/update/urn:li:share:7183463504585064448" height="1170" width="504" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen="" title="Embedded post"></iframe>

### Content Update

A new week brings a new talk by Effect Days Conference.

We're thrilled to introduce [Jess Martin](https://twitter.com/jessmartin)'s talk, titled "Solving the distributed schema problem with @effect/schema." In this session, the author of [DXOS](https://dxos.org/) unveils a groundbreaking software architecture that involves a peer-to-peer system, integrates the Effect Schema package, and includes a demo of local-first software.

<YouTube url="https://www.youtube.com/embed/o-SvvUA7hik?si=Ir7MlXbe-P72wEWu" />


If you haven't already checked them out, you can find the playlist featuring the talks already published, and all other contents from Effect Days [here](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLDf3uQLaK2B9a4tbMgGd9wFeEnMA50z4w). Also, we'd like to remind you to follow us on [X](https://twitter.com/EffectTS_) and [YouTube](https://www.youtube.com/@effect-ts) for all future updates.

A big thank you goes out to [Lucas Barake](https://www.youtube.com/@lucas-barake) for crafting this fantastic video. Lucas, we greatly appreciate you spreading the word about Effect to your community!

<YouTube url="https://www.youtube.com/embed/X98vwMYxRXw?si=vO60NCsRLhRRXjMi" />

Speaking of communities, this week our [Milad](https://twitter.com/signlanguagete1) teaches us how to say "Dual" in sign language. Thank you so much, Milad, for your ongoing support! 

<Tweet id="1777434202125791354" />

Our [Sebastian](https://twitter.com/thefubhy) seems to enjoy dropping spoilers. Could there be a big announcement just around the corner?

<Tweet id="1778327330735132848" />

To wrap up this week's update, we'd like to share this stunning photo sent to us by a member of our community. Our journey is taking us to far places, but it's just the beginning.

<Tweet id="1777302932850946203" />

## Closing Notes

That's all for this week. Thank you for being a vital part of our community. Your feedback is highly valued as we fine-tune this new format. Feel free to share your thoughts, and we'll do our best to tailor it to the needs of our community.

_The Effect Community Team_
