content/blog/0028-this-week-in-effect-2024-06-07.mdx, before:

---
title: This Week in Effect - 2024-06-07
excerpt: Effect 3.3 release. 'Building type-safe REST APIs powered by @effect/schema' by Anna DevMiner.
date: 2024-06-07
authors:
  - name: Davide Scognamiglio
    description: Project Manager
    avatar: https://pbs.twimg.com/profile_images/1329959878476111875/evHG8VX6_400x400.jpg
    twitter: https://twitter.com/DadeSkoTV
  - name: Mirela Prifti
    description: Community Manager
    avatar: https://pbs.twimg.com/profile_images/1728403785024770048/frKphayT_400x400.jpg
    twitter: https://twitter.com/mirepri4
  - name: Michael Arnaldi
    description: Chief Executive Officer
    avatar: https://pbs.twimg.com/profile_images/1232338149340319751/Ln9nNWyk_400x400.jpg
    twitter: https://twitter.com/MichaelArnaldi
relatedPosts:
  - this-week-in-effect-2024-05-31
---

Hi Effecters! 

Welcome back to This Week In Effect (**TWIE**), a weekly update to keep you in the loop with all the latest developments in the Effect community and ecosystem.

Effect is a powerful TypeScript library designed to help developers create complex, synchronous, and asynchronous programs. One of the key features that sets Effect apart is how it leverages structured concurrency to provide features such as async cancellation and safe resource management, making it easier to build robust, scalable, and efficient programs.

To get started with Effect, explore our quick-start guide and documentation below.

- [Effect quick-start guide](/docs/quickstart)
- [Effect docs](/docs/introduction)

We want to make it easy for you to find everything you need to fully enjoy your Effect journey and actively engage with the community! Here, you'll find all the significant developments from the previous week, including community activities such as Discord discussions, noteworthy posts, YouTube content, and technical advancements.

**Recent major updates**

- Effect became API stable with the [Effect 3.0 release](https://effect.website/blog/effect-3.0).
- [Effect 3.3](https://effect.website/blog/effect-3.3) has been released.
- Our community on Discord reached **2950+ members**!
- We're publishing new Effect Days talks every week on the [Effect YouTube channel](https://www.youtube.com/@effect-ts).


## Technology

Here are all the technical changes that occurred last week (note that changes included in the 3.3 release will not be listed).

### Effect Core
+ [Ensure Equal considers Date by value](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2894) (Bug Fix)
+ [Fix id extraction in Context.Tag.Identifier](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2914) (Bug Fix)
+ [Remove toJSON from PrettyError and fix message generation](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2912) (Bug Fix)
+ [Remove usage of performance.timeOrigin](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2921) (Bug Fix)
+ [Only wrap objects with string keys in Config.Wrap](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2923) (Bug Fix)
+ [README: update pull requests guidelines](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2935) (Documentation Update)
+ [Add documentation for Predicate.implies](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2937) (Documentation Update)

### Effect RPC
+ [Ensure rpc client properly detects Stream requests](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2934) (Bug Fix)


### Effect Platform
+ [Make baseUrl more defensive in @effect/platform](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2903) (Refactor)
+ [Ensure pre-response handler is checked after running the user-provided http app](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2931) (Bug Fix)


### Effect CLI
+ [Fix print to stdout of cli](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2920) (Bug Fix)

### Effect SQL
+ [Add @effect/sql-drizzle integration package](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2860) (Feature)
+ [Update @effect/sql dependencies](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2932) (Improvement)



### Effect Schema
+ [Schema: Add documentation for handling equality in Schema.Class](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2893) (Documentation Update)
+ [Add encodedBoundSchema API](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2897) (Feature)
+ [Update @since version in schema files to 0.67.0](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2899) (Improvement)
+ [Schema: expose property signature schemas](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2892) (Improvement)
+ [Add support for string literals to Schema.TemplateLiteral and TemplateLiteral API interface](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2901) (Feature)
+ [EncodedBoundSchema: preserve array stable filters](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2902)
+ [Add support for unions to rename](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2905) (Improvement)
+ [TemplateLiteral: fix bug related to "number"span](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2908) (Bug Fix)
+ [Schema: align constructors arguments](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2915) (Refactor)
+ [Add support for AST.Literal in Schema.TemplateLiteral](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2916) (Feature)
+ [Add propertyOrder option to ParseOptions to control the order of keys in the output](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2926) (Feature)
+ [PropertyOrder: do not add missing optional values](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2930) (Bug Fix)
+ [Schema: add Redacted docs](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2939) (Documentation Update)
+ [Schema: fix Redacted since tag](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2941) (Bug Fix)


### General Chore
+ [update and simplify flake.nix](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2895)


## Community highlights

In the last week, we welcomed +50 new Effecters to our [Discord community](https://discord.gg/effect-ts) - we're excited to have you on board!


The [Evryg](https://www.evryg.com) team has announced the date of the second [Effect Paris Meetup](https://www.meetup.com/effect-paris/#): **Tuesday, June 25th at 7:00 PM**. Now accepting talk submissions—[submit yours today](https://github.com/evryg-org/effect-paris/issues/new?template=talk.yml)! As a reminder, the meetup will be in French.
<Tweet id="1793661086291710258" />

### Content update

+ Another talk from the Effect Days Conference was released on Monday, 'Next level type safety with Effect' by [Aleksandra Sikora](https://x.com/aleksandrasays). In her presentation, Aleksandra discusses the benefits of using Effect, a meta-framework for TypeScript that takes it to the next level and helps handle code complexity, async code, dependency injection, and error handling in a type-safe manner.
<YouTube url="https://www.youtube.com/embed/Wtc7T-9YxYg?si=C7ypYEPVpg4PKV3U" />


## Closing notes

That's all for this week. Thank you for being a vital part of our community. Your feedback is highly valued as we fine-tune this format. Feel free to share your thoughts, and we'll do our best to tailor it to the needs of our community.

_Effect Community Team_

Commit message:

updated community section, added related post to twie_31_05_2024

content/blog/0028-this-week-in-effect-2024-06-07.mdx, after:

---
title: This Week in Effect - 2024-06-07
excerpt: Effect 3.3 release. 'Building type-safe REST APIs powered by @effect/schema' by Anna DevMiner.
date: 2024-06-07
authors:
  - name: Davide Scognamiglio
    description: Project Manager
    avatar: https://pbs.twimg.com/profile_images/1329959878476111875/evHG8VX6_400x400.jpg
    twitter: https://twitter.com/DadeSkoTV
  - name: Mirela Prifti
    description: Community Manager
    avatar: https://pbs.twimg.com/profile_images/1728403785024770048/frKphayT_400x400.jpg
    twitter: https://twitter.com/mirepri4
  - name: Michael Arnaldi
    description: Chief Executive Officer
    avatar: https://pbs.twimg.com/profile_images/1232338149340319751/Ln9nNWyk_400x400.jpg
    twitter: https://twitter.com/MichaelArnaldi
relatedPosts:
  - this-week-in-effect-2024-05-31
---

Hi Effecters! 

Welcome back to This Week In Effect (**TWIE**), a weekly update to keep you in the loop with all the latest developments in the Effect community and ecosystem.

Effect is a powerful TypeScript library designed to help developers create complex, synchronous, and asynchronous programs. One of the key features that sets Effect apart is how it leverages structured concurrency to provide features such as async cancellation and safe resource management, making it easier to build robust, scalable, and efficient programs.

To get started with Effect, explore our quick-start guide and documentation below.

- [Effect quick-start guide](/docs/quickstart)
- [Effect docs](/docs/introduction)

We want to make it easy for you to find everything you need to fully enjoy your Effect journey and actively engage with the community! Here, you'll find all the significant developments from the previous week, including community activities such as Discord discussions, noteworthy posts, YouTube content, and technical advancements.

**Recent major updates**

- Effect became API stable with the [Effect 3.0 release](https://effect.website/blog/effect-3.0).
- [Effect 3.3](https://effect.website/blog/effect-3.3) has been released.
- Our community on Discord reached **2950+ members**!
- We're publishing new Effect Days talks every week on the [Effect YouTube channel](https://www.youtube.com/@effect-ts).


## Technology

Here are all the technical changes that occurred last week (note that changes included in the 3.3 release will not be listed).

### Effect Core
+ [Ensure Equal considers Date by value](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2894) (Bug Fix)
+ [Fix id extraction in Context.Tag.Identifier](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2914) (Bug Fix)
+ [Remove toJSON from PrettyError and fix message generation](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2912) (Bug Fix)
+ [Remove usage of performance.timeOrigin](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2921) (Bug Fix)
+ [Only wrap objects with string keys in Config.Wrap](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2923) (Bug Fix)
+ [README: update pull requests guidelines](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2935) (Documentation Update)
+ [Add documentation for Predicate.implies](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2937) (Documentation Update)
+ [Redacted: add JSDocs](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2944) (Documentation Update)
+ [Add Either.liftPredicate](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2919) (Feature, next-minor)

### Effect RPC
+ [Ensure rpc client properly detects Stream requests](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2934) (Bug Fix)

### Effect Platform
+ [Make baseUrl more defensive in @effect/platform](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2903) (Refactor)
+ [Ensure pre-response handler is checked after running the user-provided http app](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2931) (Bug Fix)

### Effect CLI
+ [Fix print to stdout of cli](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2920) (Bug Fix)

### Effect SQL
+ [Add @effect/sql-drizzle integration package](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2860) (Feature)
+ [Update @effect/sql dependencies](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2932) (Improvement)

### Effect Schema
+ [Schema: Add documentation for handling equality in Schema.Class](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2893) (Documentation Update)
+ [Add encodedBoundSchema API](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2897) (Feature)
+ [Update @since version in schema files to 0.67.0](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2899) (Improvement)
+ [Schema: expose property signature schemas](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2892) (Improvement)
+ [Add support for string literals to Schema.TemplateLiteral and TemplateLiteral API interface](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2901) (Feature)
+ [EncodedBoundSchema: preserve array stable filters](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2902)
+ [Add support for unions to rename](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2905) (Improvement)
+ [TemplateLiteral: fix bug related to "number"span](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2908) (Bug Fix)
+ [Schema: align constructors arguments](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2915) (Refactor)
+ [Add support for AST.Literal in Schema.TemplateLiteral](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2916) (Feature)
+ [Add propertyOrder option to ParseOptions to control the order of keys in the output](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2926) (Feature)
+ [PropertyOrder: do not add missing optional values](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2930) (Bug Fix)
+ [Schema: add Redacted docs](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2939) (Documentation Update)
+ [Schema: fix Redacted since tag](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2941) (Bug Fix)
+ [Docs(Schema): add more examples for renaming properties in the README](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2945) (Documentation Update)


### General Chore
+ [update and simplify flake.nix](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2895)


## Community highlights

In the last week, we welcomed +50 new Effecters to our [Discord community](https://discord.gg/effect-ts) - we're excited to have you on board!

Effect reached the milestone of **6000 followers** on [X](https://x.com/EffectTS_). We want to extend our thanks to all the members of our community for their continuous support and trust.

Following the introduction of the single fetch feature by [Remix](https://x.com/remix_run), [Stephen Bluck](https://x.com/whatthebluck) is asking for help with his loaders built with Effect and how they should return data. Looking at the before and after pictures, can you help him spot the differences?👀
<Tweet id="1797581709359403385" />

The [inato](https://x.com/inatohealth) team completed the migration from fp-ts to Effect, and shared [their insights](https://dev.to/laurerc/how-we-migrated-our-codebase-from-fp-ts-to-effect-5bbk) about how they could reach this goal in just two months. Congratulations to the team for this outstanding achievement.
<Tweet id="1798030308350259614" />

The [Evryg](https://www.evryg.com) team has announced the date of the second [Effect Paris Meetup](https://www.meetup.com/effect-paris/#): **Tuesday, June 25th at 7:00 PM**. Now accepting talk submissions—[submit yours today](https://github.com/evryg-org/effect-paris/issues/new?template=talk.yml)! As a reminder, the meetup will be in French.
<Tweet id="1793661086291710258" />

### Content update

+ On Monday, we released a new talk from the Effect Days Conference. 'Building type-safe REST APIs powered by @effect/schema' by [Anna DevMiner](https://x.com/TheDevMinerTV). In her presentation, Anna discusses the importance of type-safe REST APIs and presents a solution using Zod and @effect/schema.
<YouTube url="https://www.youtube.com/embed/TUQbLqmO0_M?si=-AVcGsFt1kp6bsfX" />


## Closing notes

That's all for this week. Thank you for being a vital part of our community. Your feedback is highly valued as we fine-tune this format. Feel free to share your thoughts, and we'll do our best to tailor it to the needs of our community.

_Effect Community Team_
