content/blog/0029-this-week-in-effect-2024-06-14.mdx, before:

---
title: This Week in Effect - 2024-06-14
excerpt: Effect 3.3 release. 'Building type-safe REST APIs powered by @effect/schema' by Anna DevMiner.
date: 2024-06-14
authors:
  - name: Davide Scognamiglio
    description: Project Manager
    avatar: https://pbs.twimg.com/profile_images/1329959878476111875/evHG8VX6_400x400.jpg
    twitter: https://twitter.com/DadeSkoTV
  - name: Mirela Prifti
    description: Community Manager
    avatar: https://pbs.twimg.com/profile_images/1728403785024770048/frKphayT_400x400.jpg
    twitter: https://twitter.com/mirepri4
  - name: Michael Arnaldi
    description: Chief Executive Officer
    avatar: https://pbs.twimg.com/profile_images/1232338149340319751/Ln9nNWyk_400x400.jpg
    twitter: https://twitter.com/MichaelArnaldi
relatedPosts:
  - this-week-in-effect-2024-06-07
---

Hi Effecters! 

Welcome back to This Week In Effect (**TWIE**), a weekly update to keep you in the loop with all the latest developments in the Effect community and ecosystem.

Effect is a powerful TypeScript library designed to help developers create complex, synchronous, and asynchronous programs. One of the key features that sets Effect apart is how it leverages structured concurrency to provide features such as async cancellation and safe resource management, making it easier to build robust, scalable, and efficient programs.

To get started with Effect, explore our quick-start guide and documentation below.

- [Effect quick-start guide](/docs/quickstart)
- [Effect docs](/docs/introduction)

We want to make it easy for you to find everything you need to fully enjoy your Effect journey and actively engage with the community! Here, you'll find all the significant developments from the previous week, including community activities such as Discord discussions, noteworthy posts, YouTube content, and technical advancements.

**Recent major updates**

- Effect became API stable with the [Effect 3.0 release](https://effect.website/blog/effect-3.0).
- [Effect 3.3](https://effect.website/blog/effect-3.3) has been released.
- Our community on Discord reached **3000+ members**!
- We're publishing new Effect Days talks every week on the [Effect YouTube channel](https://www.youtube.com/@effect-ts).


## Technology

Here are all the technical changes that occurred last week.

### Effect Core
+ [Change Config.array to return Array instead of ReadonlyArray](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2952) (Feature)
+ [CatchTag: add more type-level tests](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2962) (Feature)
+ [Fix runtime error in Struct.evolve by enhancing compile-time checks](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2954) (Bug Fix)
+ [Updated Chunk.toArray and Chunk.toReadonlyArray. Improved function signatures to preserve non-empty status of chunks during conversion.](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2970) (Improvement)
+ [Fix Unify for Stream](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2917) (Bug Fix)
+ [Fix discard option in Effect.all](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2977) (Bug Fix)
+ [Ensure multiline error messages are preserved in cause rendering](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2981) (Bug Fix)
+ [Add lastNonEmpty function to Chunk module](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2951) (Featire, next-minor)
+ [Feat(Stream): implement Success, Error, Context type accessors](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2959) (Feature, next-minor)
+ [Make Option.liftPredicate dual](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2957) (Feature, next-minor)

### Effect Platform
+ [Fix KeyValueStore for react native by making constructors lazy](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2966) (Bug Fix)
+ [Update example fix for workspaces](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2963) (Refactor)
+ [Typo in Example Source Code in README.md](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2983) (Documentation Update)

### Effect Experimental
+ [Improve dataLoader concurrency when max batch size is hit](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2980) (Improvement)

### Effect Schema
+ [The minItems filter now checks for an invalid argument (n < 1) and, when valid, refines the type to NonEmptyReadonlyArray<A>.](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2955) (Feature)
+ [Clarify usage and behavior of Schema.is in documentation](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2960) (Documentation Update)
+ [Update propertyOrder option in README to use "original" instead of "input"](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2964) (Documentation Update)
+ [Remove stray bit of text in Italian](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2969) (Documentation Update)
+ [Add Schema.NonEmptyChunkFromSelf and Schema.NonEmptyChunk](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2971) (Feature)
+ [Add instructions for handling unsupported types in JSON Schema generation to README](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2984) (Documentation Update)


## Community highlights

In the last week, we welcomed +50 new Effecters to our [Discord community](https://discord.gg/effect-ts), our community reached the outstanding milestone of 3000 Discord members and we're exited to have you on board! 


+ The [Evryg](https://www.evryg.com) team has announced the date of the second [Effect Paris Meetup](https://www.meetup.com/effect-paris/#): **Tuesday, June 25th at 7:00 PM**. Now accepting talk submissions—[submit yours today](https://github.com/evryg-org/effect-paris/issues/new?template=talk.yml)! As a reminder, the meetup will be in French.
<Tweet id="1793661086291710258" />

### Content update

+ On Monday, we released a new talk from the Effect Days Conference. 'Building type-safe REST APIs powered by @effect/schema' by [Anna DevMiner](https://x.com/TheDevMinerTV). In her presentation, Anna discusses the importance of type-safe REST APIs and shows a solution using Zod and @effect/schema.
<YouTube url="https://www.youtube.com/embed/TUQbLqmO0_M?si=-AVcGsFt1kp6bsfX" />


## Closing notes

That's all for this week. Thank you for being a vital part of our community. Your feedback is highly valued as we fine-tune this format. Feel free to share your thoughts, and we'll do our best to tailor it to the needs of our community.

_Effect Community Team_

Commit message:

Updated tech and community sections. Update excerpt

content/blog/0029-this-week-in-effect-2024-06-14.mdx, after:

---
title: This Week in Effect - 2024-06-14
excerpt: Technical updates in Effect. "The Most Exciting Use of Technology" award. 'Effect CLI - A love letter to developers tired of settling for less' by Maxwell Brown.
date: 2024-06-14
authors:
  - name: Davide Scognamiglio
    description: Project Manager
    avatar: https://pbs.twimg.com/profile_images/1329959878476111875/evHG8VX6_400x400.jpg
    twitter: https://twitter.com/DadeSkoTV
  - name: Mirela Prifti
    description: Community Manager
    avatar: https://pbs.twimg.com/profile_images/1728403785024770048/frKphayT_400x400.jpg
    twitter: https://twitter.com/mirepri4
  - name: Michael Arnaldi
    description: Chief Executive Officer
    avatar: https://pbs.twimg.com/profile_images/1232338149340319751/Ln9nNWyk_400x400.jpg
    twitter: https://twitter.com/MichaelArnaldi
relatedPosts:
  - this-week-in-effect-2024-06-07
---

Hi Effecters! 

Welcome back to This Week In Effect (**TWIE**), a weekly update to keep you in the loop with all the latest developments in the Effect community and ecosystem.

Effect is a powerful TypeScript library designed to help developers create complex, synchronous, and asynchronous programs. One of the key features that sets Effect apart is how it leverages structured concurrency to provide features such as async cancellation and safe resource management, making it easier to build robust, scalable, and efficient programs.

To get started with Effect, explore our quick-start guide and documentation below.

- [Effect quick-start guide](/docs/quickstart)
- [Effect docs](/docs/introduction)

We want to make it easy for you to find everything you need to fully enjoy your Effect journey and actively engage with the community! Here, you'll find all the significant developments from the previous week, including community activities such as Discord discussions, noteworthy posts, YouTube content, and technical advancements.

**Recent major updates**

- Effect became API stable with the [Effect 3.0 release](https://effect.website/blog/effect-3.0).
- [Effect 3.3](https://effect.website/blog/effect-3.3) has been released.
- Our community on Discord reached **3000+ members**!
- We're publishing new Effect Days talks every week on the [Effect YouTube channel](https://www.youtube.com/@effect-ts).


## Technology

Here are all the technical changes that occurred last week.

### Effect Core
+ [Change Config.array to return Array instead of ReadonlyArray](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2952) (Feature)
+ [CatchTag: add more type-level tests](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2962) (Feature)
+ [Fix runtime error in Struct.evolve by enhancing compile-time checks](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2954) (Bug Fix)
+ [Updated Chunk.toArray and Chunk.toReadonlyArray. Improved function signatures to preserve non-empty status of chunks during conversion.](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2970) (Improvement)
+ [Fix Unify for Stream](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2917) (Bug Fix)
+ [Fix discard option in Effect.all](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2977) (Bug Fix)
+ [Ensure multiline error messages are preserved in cause rendering](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2981) (Bug Fix)
+ [Add lastNonEmpty function to Chunk module](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2951) (Feature, next-minor)
+ [Feat(Stream): implement Success, Error, Context type accessors](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2959) (Feature, next-minor)
+ [Make Option.liftPredicate dual](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2957) (Feature, next-minor)
+ [Implement at method for tuples](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2976) (Feature, next-minor)

### Effect Platform
+ [Fix KeyValueStore for react native by making constructors lazy](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2966) (Bug Fix)
+ [Update example fix for workspaces](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2963) (Refactor)
+ [Typo in Example Source Code in README.md](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2983) (Documentation Update)
+ [Refactor Socket to use do notation](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2988) (Refactor)

### Effect Experimental
+ [Improve dataLoader concurrency when max batch size is hit](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2980) (Improvement)

### Effect Schema
+ [The minItems filter now checks for an invalid argument n inferior to 1 and, when valid, refines the type to NonEmptyReadonlyArray"A".](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2955) (Feature)
+ [Clarify usage and behavior of Schema.is in documentation](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2960) (Documentation Update)
+ [Update propertyOrder option in README to use "original" instead of "input"](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2964) (Documentation Update)
+ [Remove stray bit of text in Italian](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2969) (Documentation Update)
+ [Add Schema.NonEmptyChunkFromSelf and Schema.NonEmptyChunk](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2971) (Feature)
+ [Add instructions for handling unsupported types in JSON Schema generation to README](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2984) (Documentation Update)
+ [Enhance README with guidelines on schema transformations and arbitrary data generation best practices](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2987) (Documentation Update)


## Community highlights

In the last week, we welcomed +50 new Effecters to our [Discord community](https://discord.gg/effect-ts), our community reached the outstanding milestone of 3000 Discord members and we're excited to have you on board! 

We have great news. Effect has won the **The Most Exciting Use of Technology 2024** award at [JSNation](https://x.com/thejsnation) Conference 2024. We want to thank everyone who supported us and helped Effect win its first official award. We also thank [Sandro Maglione](https://x.com/SandroMaglione) who was at the Conference representing the Effect Team.
<Tweet id="1801339857673011290" />

+ [Sandro](https://x.com/SandroMaglione) also spotted Effect at the [React Summit](https://x.com/ReactSummit) in Amsterdam 👀
<Tweet id="1801503801330774430" />

+ [Gheorghe Pinzaru](https://x.com/Ferossgp), Builder of [3loop.io](https://3loop.io/), shared some feedbacks about choosing Effect as the transaction decoder platform for his application.
 <Tweet id="1800970332158804116" />

+ [Johannes Schickling](https://x.com/schickling), Effect DX and Software Engineer, reminded us one of the most imprtant Effect fundamentals: "If it compiles, it works".
  <Tweet id="1800175761116311941" />

+ [Milad Vafaeifard](https://x.com/miladvafaeifard), Software Engineer, Effect Advocate and Creator of [Sign Language Tech](https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCIPaBhc8mQHrt6o0OTuCUXQ), will be giving two talks @ the [JSConf Budapest](https://jsconfbp.com/) on the 27th and 28th June.
  <Tweet id="1800828171685871670" />  

+ The [Evryg](https://www.evryg.com) team has announced the date of the second [Effect Paris Meetup](https://www.meetup.com/effect-paris/#): **Tuesday, June 25th at 7:00 PM**. Now accepting talk submissions—[submit yours today](https://github.com/evryg-org/effect-paris/issues/new?template=talk.yml)! As a reminder, the meetup will be in French.
<Tweet id="1793661086291710258" />

### Content update

+ We released a new talk from the Effect Days Conference on monday. 'Effect CLI - A love letter to developers tired of settling for less' by [Maxwell Brown](https://x.com/imax153). In his presentation, Maxwell introduces Effect CLI, a library designed to improve the developer experience on the command line, and demonstrates its features with an example CLI application.
<YouTube url="https://www.youtube.com/embed/BiEuN6lbXzw?si=b1zionIsUgQNGK3S" />

+ [Convex](https://x.com/convex_dev), Open-Source Backend all-in-one Platform, published a video showing the Convex + Effect (= Confect 🧁) integration.
<Tweet id="1800558928251744377" />


## Closing notes

That's all for this week. Thank you for being a vital part of our community. Your feedback is highly valued as we fine-tune this format. Feel free to share your thoughts, and we'll do our best to tailor it to the needs of our community.

_Effect Community Team_
