content/blog/0032-this-week-in-effect-2024-06-21.mdx, before:

---
title: This Week in Effect - 2024-06-21
excerpt: Technical updates in Effect. "The Most Exciting Use of Technology" award. 'Effect CLI - A love letter to developers tired of settling for less' by Maxwell Brown.
date: 2024-06-21
authors:
  - name: Davide Scognamiglio
    description: Project Manager
    avatar: https://pbs.twimg.com/profile_images/1329959878476111875/evHG8VX6_400x400.jpg
    twitter: https://twitter.com/DadeSkoTV
  - name: Mirela Prifti
    description: Community Manager
    avatar: https://pbs.twimg.com/profile_images/1728403785024770048/frKphayT_400x400.jpg
    twitter: https://twitter.com/mirepri4
  - name: Michael Arnaldi
    description: Chief Executive Officer
    avatar: https://pbs.twimg.com/profile_images/1232338149340319751/Ln9nNWyk_400x400.jpg
    twitter: https://twitter.com/MichaelArnaldi
relatedPosts:
  - this-week-in-effect-2024-06-14
---

Hi Effecters! 

Welcome back to This Week In Effect (**TWIE**), a weekly update to keep you in the loop with all the latest developments in the Effect community and ecosystem.

Effect is a powerful TypeScript library designed to help developers create complex, synchronous, and asynchronous programs. One of the key features that sets Effect apart is how it leverages structured concurrency to provide features such as async cancellation and safe resource management, making it easier to build robust, scalable, and efficient programs.

To get started with Effect, explore our quick-start guide and documentation below.

- [Effect quick-start guide](/docs/quickstart)
- [Effect docs](/docs/introduction)

We want to make it easy for you to find everything you need to fully enjoy your Effect journey and actively engage with the community! Here, you'll find all the significant developments from the previous week, including community activities such as Discord discussions, noteworthy posts, YouTube content, and technical advancements.

**Recent major updates**

- Effect became API stable with the [Effect 3.0 release](https://effect.website/blog/effect-3.0).
- [Effect 3.4](https://effect.website/blog/effect-3.3) has been released.
- Our community on Discord reached **3060+ members**!
- We're publishing new Effect Days talks every week on the [Effect YouTube channel](https://www.youtube.com/@effect-ts).


## Technology

Here are all the technical changes that occurred last week.

### Effect Core
+ [Chunk tests](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2999) (Feature)
+ [Fix support for Predicates in Predicate.compose](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3000) (Bug Fix)
+ [Use Math.random for Hash.random](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3001) (Feature)
+ [JSDocs: add examples to caching functions](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3008) (Documentation Update)
+ [Fix typo in Effect.ts](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3011) (Documentation Update)
+ [Ensure Config.Wrap only destructures plain objects](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3012) (Bug Fix)
+ [(JSDoc) add descriptions and examples to Effect.zip and Effect.zipWith](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3019) (Documentation Update)
+ [Fix typos in Schedule.ts](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3026) (Documentation Update)

### Effect Platform
+ [Add documentation for toWebHandler function in README, including usage example](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3009) (Documentation Update)
+ [Update find-my-way-ts to fix vercel edge support](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3021) (Bug Fix)
+ [Update README with example on mocking fetch for HTTP request testing](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3007) (Documentation Update)

### Effect Schema
+ [Remove Simplify from extend, pick, omit, pluck APIs](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2991) (Refactor)
+ [Add internal mergeSchemaAnnotations](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2992) (Improvement)
+ [Expose exact option for strict decoding on missing properties](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2994) (Feature)
+ [Improve error handling (type-level) for improper usage of optional](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2997) (Improvement)
+ [Fix typo (isExact -> exact) and make internal toASTAnnotations more general](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2998) (Improvement)
+ [Schema: version 0.68.0](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2906) (Feature, Bug Fix, minor)
+ [Fix handling of exact option overrides in AST.ParseOptions and improve error messaging in Pretty.make for unmatched union schemas](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3015) (Bug Fix)
+ [Replace Types.Simplify with a custom Simplify to restore nice types for pick and omit](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3024) (Refactor)

### General Chores
+ [Add @effect/cluster-* packages](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2927)


## Community highlights

In the last week, we welcomed +60 new Effecters to our [Discord community](https://discord.gg/effect-ts), our community reached the outstanding milestone of 3000 Discord members! We're very excited to have you all on board! 



+ The [Evryg](https://www.evryg.com) team has announced the date of the second [Effect Paris Meetup](https://www.meetup.com/effect-paris/#): **Tuesday, June 25th at 7:00 PM**. Now accepting talk submissions—[submit yours today](https://github.com/evryg-org/effect-paris/issues/new?template=talk.yml)! As a reminder, the meetup will be in French.
<Tweet id="1793661086291710258" />

### Content update

+ We released a new talk from the Effect Days Conference on Monday. 'Effect CLI - A love letter to developers tired of settling for less' by [Maxwell Brown](https://x.com/imax153). In his presentation, Maxwell introduces Effect CLI, a library designed to improve the developer experience on the command line, and demonstrates its features with an example CLI application. Check out the video below.
<YouTube url="https://www.youtube.com/embed/BiEuN6lbXzw?si=b1zionIsUgQNGK3S" />


## Closing notes

That's all for this week. Thank you for being a vital part of our community. Your feedback is highly valued as we fine-tune this format. Feel free to share your thoughts, and we'll do our best to tailor it to the needs of our community.

_Effect Community Team_

Commit message:

updated tech & community section. added related post to twie_14_06_2024

content/blog/0032-this-week-in-effect-2024-06-21.mdx, after:

---
title: This Week in Effect - 2024-06-21
excerpt: Effect 3.4 and Schema 0.68.0 release. 'Discriminated Unions in TypeScript, Effect, and ArkType' by David Blass. Michael Arnaldi's live coding session @ LUNGorg
date: 2024-06-21
authors:
  - name: Davide Scognamiglio
    description: Project Manager
    avatar: https://pbs.twimg.com/profile_images/1329959878476111875/evHG8VX6_400x400.jpg
    twitter: https://twitter.com/DadeSkoTV
  - name: Mirela Prifti
    description: Community Manager
    avatar: https://pbs.twimg.com/profile_images/1728403785024770048/frKphayT_400x400.jpg
    twitter: https://twitter.com/mirepri4
  - name: Michael Arnaldi
    description: Chief Executive Officer
    avatar: https://pbs.twimg.com/profile_images/1232338149340319751/Ln9nNWyk_400x400.jpg
    twitter: https://twitter.com/MichaelArnaldi
relatedPosts:
  - this-week-in-effect-2024-06-14
---

Hi Effecters! 

Welcome back to This Week In Effect (**TWIE**), a weekly update to keep you in the loop with all the latest developments in the Effect community and ecosystem.

Effect is a powerful TypeScript library designed to help developers create complex, synchronous, and asynchronous programs. One of the key features that sets Effect apart is how it leverages structured concurrency to provide features such as async cancellation and safe resource management, making it easier to build robust, scalable, and efficient programs.

To get started with Effect, explore our quick-start guide and documentation below.

- [Effect quick-start guide](/docs/quickstart)
- [Effect docs](/docs/introduction)

We want to make it easy for you to find everything you need to fully enjoy your Effect journey and actively engage with the community! Here, you'll find all the significant developments from the previous week, including community activities such as Discord discussions, noteworthy posts, YouTube content, and technical advancements.

**Recent major updates**

- Effect became API stable with the [Effect 3.0 release](https://effect.website/blog/effect-3.0).
- [Effect 3.4](https://effect.website/blog/effect-3.3) has been released.
- Our community on Discord reached **3060+ members**!
- We're publishing new Effect Days talks every week on the [Effect YouTube channel](https://www.youtube.com/@effect-ts).


## Technology

[Effect 3.4](https://effect.website/blog/effect-3.4) and [Schema 0.68.0](https://effect.website/blog/schema-release-0.68) have been released. 

Here are all the technical changes that occurred last week (note that changes included in the mentioned releases will not be listed).

### Effect Core
+ [Chunk tests](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2999) (Feature)
+ [Fix support for Predicates in Predicate.compose](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3000) (Bug Fix)
+ [Use Math.random for Hash.random](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3001) (Feature)
+ [JSDocs: add examples to caching functions](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3008) (Documentation Update)
+ [Fix typo in Effect.ts](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3011) (Documentation Update)
+ [Ensure Config.Wrap only destructures plain objects](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3012) (Bug Fix)
+ [(JSDoc) add descriptions and examples to Effect.zip and Effect.zipWith](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3019) (Documentation Update)
+ [Fix typos in Schedule.ts](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3026) (Documentation Update)

### Effect Platform
+ [Add documentation for toWebHandler function in README, including usage example](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3009) (Documentation Update)
+ [Update find-my-way-ts to fix vercel edge support](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3021) (Bug Fix)
+ [Update README with example on mocking fetch for HTTP request testing](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3007) (Documentation Update)
+ [Update find-my-way-ts & multipasta](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3030) (Feature)
+ [Remove dependency on /platform-node from DevTools](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3036) (Refactor)

### Effect Experimental
+ [Remove dependency on /platform-node from DevTools](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3036) (Refactor)

### Effect SQL
+ [Restructure sql modules to have flat imports](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3035) (Refactor)

### Effect Cluster
+ [Restructure sql modules to have flat imports](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3035) (Refactor)

### Effect Schema
+ [Remove Simplify from extend, pick, omit, pluck APIs](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2991) (Refactor)
+ [Add internal mergeSchemaAnnotations](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2992) (Improvement)
+ [Expose exact option for strict decoding on missing properties](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2994) (Feature)
+ [Improve error handling (type-level) for improper usage of optional](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2997) (Improvement)
+ [Fix typo (isExact -> exact) and make internal toASTAnnotations more general](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2998) (Improvement)
+ [Schema: version 0.68.0](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2906) (Feature, Bug Fix, minor)
+ [Fix handling of exact option overrides in AST.ParseOptions and improve error messaging in Pretty.make for unmatched union schemas](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3015) (Bug Fix)
+ [Replace Types.Simplify with a custom Simplify to restore nice types for pick and omit](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3024) (Refactor)
+ [Introducing Customizable Parsing Behavior at the Schema Level](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3028) (Feature)
+ [Schema Readme: update Troubleshooting When Working With Generic Schemas section to latest changes](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3038) (Documentation Update)

### General Chores
+ [Add @effect/cluster-* packages](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2927)


## Community highlights

In the last week, we welcomed +60 new Effecters to our [Discord community](https://discord.gg/effect-ts). We're very excited to have you all on board! 

+ [Alfredo Moreira](https://x.com/ecyrbedev), Tech Lead @ [Zodios](https://www.zodios.org), is adding [Kysely](https://kysely.dev) support for Effect as a DB query builder. Feel free to take a look at the [open PR](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3017) and provide feedback.
<Tweet id="1803552136363380831" />

+ [Michael Arnaldi](https://x.com/MichaelArnaldi) will join the [London Node.js User Group](https://x.com/LNUGorg) next week for a live coding session on Wednesday, June 26.
<Tweet id="1798704071161110554" />

+ In his latest guide, [Sandro Maglione](https://x.com/SandroMaglione) faces the challenge of building a robust auth solution based on Effect with all the changes coming with React 19 and new primitives added to Node.js. 
<Tweet id="1803829211611746506" />

+ The [Evryg](https://www.evryg.com) team has announced the date of the second [Effect Paris Meetup](https://www.meetup.com/effect-paris/#): **Tuesday, June 25th at 7:00 PM**. Now accepting talk submissions—[submit yours today](https://github.com/evryg-org/effect-paris/issues/new?template=talk.yml)! As a reminder, the meetup will be in French.
<Tweet id="1793661086291710258" />

### Content update

+ A new talk from the Effect Days Conference has been released on Monday. 'Discriminated Unions in TypeScript, Effect, and ArkType' by [David Blass](https://x.com/ssalbdivad). In his presentation, David gave us a deeper understanding of the set theory at the heart of TypeScript and how libraries like Effect and ArkType leverage it to improve static and runtime performance and make your code safer.
<YouTube url="https://www.youtube.com/embed/AaUKLH8N6go?si=v91LFcNDB5w1FcSB" />

+ At the [Local-First Conf](https://www.localfirstconf.com/), [Jess Martin](https://x.com/jessmartin) showed how Effect Schema works with distributed data technologies like [DXOS ECHO](https://dxos.org) and [Automerge](https://automerge.org) to enable a radically better developer and end-user experience.
<YouTube url="https://www.youtube.com/embed/_GBpPp92L2M?si=npy60RNpUkB_tvt6" />

## Closing notes

That's all for this week. Thank you for being a vital part of our community. Your feedback is highly valued as we fine-tune this format. Feel free to share your thoughts, and we'll do our best to tailor it to the needs of our community.

_Effect Community Team_
