content/blog/0034-this-week-in-effect-2024-07-05.mdx, before:

---
title: This Week in Effect - 2024-07-05
excerpt:  Technical updates in Effect. 'Effect, The Origin Story' by Michael Arnaldi. Community events updates.
date: 2024-07-05
authors:
  - name: Davide Scognamiglio
    description: Project Manager
    avatar: https://pbs.twimg.com/profile_images/1329959878476111875/evHG8VX6_400x400.jpg
    twitter: https://twitter.com/DadeSkoTV
  - name: Mirela Prifti
    description: Community Manager
    avatar: https://pbs.twimg.com/profile_images/1728403785024770048/frKphayT_400x400.jpg
    twitter: https://twitter.com/mirepri4
  - name: Michael Arnaldi
    description: Chief Executive Officer
    avatar: https://pbs.twimg.com/profile_images/1232338149340319751/Ln9nNWyk_400x400.jpg
    twitter: https://twitter.com/MichaelArnaldi
relatedPosts:
  - this-week-in-effect-2024-06-28
---

Hi Effecters! 

Welcome back to This Week In Effect (**TWIE**), a weekly update to keep you in the loop with all the latest developments in the Effect community and ecosystem.

Effect is a powerful TypeScript library designed to help developers create complex, synchronous, and asynchronous programs. One of the key features that sets Effect apart is how it leverages structured concurrency to provide features such as async cancellation and safe resource management, making it easier to build robust, scalable, and efficient programs.

To get started with Effect, explore our quick-start guide and documentation below.

- [Effect quick-start guide](/docs/quickstart)
- [Effect docs](/docs/introduction)

We want to make it easy for you to find everything you need to fully enjoy your Effect journey and actively engage with the community! In this blog post series, you'll find all the significant developments from the previous week, such as Discord discussions, noteworthy posts, YouTube content, and technical advancements.

**Recent major updates**

- Effect is now API stable with the [Effect 3.0 release](https://effect.website/blog/effect-3.0).
- [Effect 3.4](https://effect.website/blog/effect-3.3) has been released.
- Our [community on Discord](https://discord.gg/effect-ts) reached 3110+ members!
- Published the last talk from Effect Days 2024 on the [Effect YouTube channel](https://www.youtube.com/@effect-ts).


## Technology

Here are all the technical changes that occurred last week.

### Effect Core
+ [Micro: renaming to align with Effect module](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3096) (Refactor)
+ [Support for the tacit usage of external handlers for Match.tag and Match.tagStartsWith functions](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3121) (Refactor, Bug Fix)
+ [Use Channel.acquireUseRelease for Channel.withSpan](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3134) (Refactor)
+ [Ensure PubSub.publishAll does not increase size while there are no subscribers](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3161) (Bug Fix)
+ [Add Stream.filterMapEffectOption function](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3023) (Feature)
+ [Refactor(Stream): rename argument names of mergeLeft and mergeRight from self/that to left/right for clarity](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3160) (Refactor, next-minor)

### Effect Platform
+ [Add HttpClient.followRedirects api](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3123) (Feature)
+ [Support undefined in http request schema apis](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3136) (Feature)

### Effect Experimental
+ [log DevTool's errors at debug level](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3138) (Bug Fix)
+ [Add PersistedCache module to /experimental](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3149) (Feature)
+ [Remove console.log from Redis persistence](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3150) (Bug Fix)
+ [Drop requirement of PrimaryKey in /experimental Persistence](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3158) (Improvement)

### Effect Schema
+ [Modified JSONSchema.make to selectively ignore the title and `descriptionfields in schema types such asSchema.String, Schema.Number, and Schema.Boolean](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3117) (Refactor)
+ [Add support for Union, Suspend, and Refinement as the second argument of extend](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3125) (Feature)
+ [Add ReadonlyMapFromRecord and MapFromRecord](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3130) (Feature)
+ [README: Recommend using the strict: true option to get better error messages from TypeScript](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3132) (Documentation Update)
+ [Optimize JSON Schema output for homogeneous tuples (such as non empty arrays)](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3139) (Improvement)
+ [Enhance JSON Schema Support for Refinements in Record Parameters](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3143) (Improvement)
+ [Add an example of a transformation where we need to use Schema.typeSchema to define the target schema.](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3145) (Documentation Update)
+ [Add PersistedCache module to /experimental](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3149) (Feature)
+ [Suppress ajv warnings in tests](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3151) (Bug Fix)
+ [Add pick and omit members to Struct interface](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3163) (Feature)
+ [Add filterEffect API](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3166) (Feature)
+ [Add Serializable docs](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3148) (Documentation Update)

### Effect CLI
+ [Adds a --log-level built-in option to all commands](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3107) (Feature)
+ [Add Prompt.file to support path-based options in the CLI's --wizard mode](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3153) (Refactor, Feature, Optimization)
+ [Ensure file selector prompts can traverse parent directories](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3167) (Bug Fix)

### Effect Vitest
+ [Refactor vitest](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3122) (Refactor)

### Effect Typeclass
+ [Add Effect and Micro basic instances](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3169) (Feature)


## Community highlights

In the last week, we welcomed +50 new Effecters to our [Discord community](https://discord.gg/effect-ts) - we're very excited to have you all on board! 



### Content update


## Closing notes

That's all for this week. Thank you for being a vital part of our community. Your feedback is highly valued as we fine-tune this format. Feel free to share your thoughts, and we'll do our best to tailor it to the needs of our community.

_Effect Community Team_

Commit message:

update community section and added related post to twie_28_06_2024

content/blog/0034-this-week-in-effect-2024-07-05.mdx, after:

---
title: This Week in Effect - 2024-07-05
excerpt:  Technical updates in Effect. 'Effect, The Origin Story' by Michael Arnaldi. Community events updates.
date: 2024-07-05
authors:
  - name: Davide Scognamiglio
    description: Project Manager
    avatar: https://pbs.twimg.com/profile_images/1329959878476111875/evHG8VX6_400x400.jpg
    twitter: https://twitter.com/DadeSkoTV
  - name: Mirela Prifti
    description: Community Manager
    avatar: https://pbs.twimg.com/profile_images/1728403785024770048/frKphayT_400x400.jpg
    twitter: https://twitter.com/mirepri4
  - name: Michael Arnaldi
    description: Chief Executive Officer
    avatar: https://pbs.twimg.com/profile_images/1232338149340319751/Ln9nNWyk_400x400.jpg
    twitter: https://twitter.com/MichaelArnaldi
relatedPosts:
  - this-week-in-effect-2024-06-28
---

Hi Effecters! 

Welcome back to This Week In Effect (**TWIE**), a weekly update to keep you in the loop with all the latest developments in the Effect community and ecosystem.

Effect is a powerful TypeScript library designed to help developers create complex, synchronous, and asynchronous programs. One of the key features that sets Effect apart is how it leverages structured concurrency to provide features such as async cancellation and safe resource management, making it easier to build robust, scalable, and efficient programs.

To get started with Effect, explore our quick-start guide and documentation below.

- [Effect quick-start guide](/docs/quickstart)
- [Effect docs](/docs/introduction)

We want to make it easy for you to find everything you need to fully enjoy your Effect journey and actively engage with the community! In this blog post series, you'll find all the significant developments from the previous week, such as Discord discussions, noteworthy posts, YouTube content, and technical advancements.

**Recent major updates**

- Effect is now API stable with the [Effect 3.0 release](https://effect.website/blog/effect-3.0).
- [Effect 3.4](https://effect.website/blog/effect-3.3) has been released.
- Our [community on Discord](https://discord.gg/effect-ts) reached 3160+ members!
- Published all talks from Effect Days 2024 on the [Effect YouTube channel](https://www.youtube.com/@effect-ts).


## Technology

Here are all the technical changes that occurred last week.

### Effect Core
+ [Micro: renaming to align with Effect module](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3096) (Refactor)
+ [Support for the tacit usage of external handlers for Match.tag and Match.tagStartsWith functions](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3121) (Refactor, Bug Fix)
+ [Use Channel.acquireUseRelease for Channel.withSpan](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3134) (Refactor)
+ [Ensure PubSub.publishAll does not increase size while there are no subscribers](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3161) (Bug Fix)
+ [Add Stream.filterMapEffectOption function](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3023) (Feature)
+ [Refactor(Stream): rename argument names of mergeLeft and mergeRight from self/that to left/right for clarity](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3160) (Refactor, next-minor)
+ [Ensure fibers are interrupted in Stream.mergeWith](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3175) (Bug Fix)
+ [Allow Stream run fiber to close before trying to interrupt it](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3176) (Bug Fix)

### Effect Platform
+ [Add HttpClient.followRedirects api](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3123) (Feature)
+ [Support undefined in http request schema apis](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3136) (Feature)

### Effect Experimental
+ [log DevTool's errors at debug level](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3138) (Bug Fix)
+ [Add PersistedCache module to /experimental](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3149) (Feature)
+ [Remove console.log from Redis persistence](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3150) (Bug Fix)
+ [Drop requirement of PrimaryKey in /experimental Persistence](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3158) (Improvement)

### Effect Schema
+ [Modified JSONSchema.make to selectively ignore the title and `descriptionfields in schema types such asSchema.String, Schema.Number, and Schema.Boolean](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3117) (Refactor)
+ [Add support for Union, Suspend, and Refinement as the second argument of extend](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3125) (Feature)
+ [Add ReadonlyMapFromRecord and MapFromRecord](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3130) (Feature)
+ [README: Recommend using the strict: true option to get better error messages from TypeScript](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3132) (Documentation Update)
+ [Optimize JSON Schema output for homogeneous tuples (such as non empty arrays)](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3139) (Improvement)
+ [Enhance JSON Schema Support for Refinements in Record Parameters](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3143) (Improvement)
+ [Add an example of a transformation where we need to use Schema.typeSchema to define the target schema.](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3145) (Documentation Update)
+ [Add PersistedCache module to /experimental](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3149) (Feature)
+ [Suppress ajv warnings in tests](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3151) (Bug Fix)
+ [Add pick and omit members to Struct interface](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3163) (Feature)
+ [Add filterEffect API](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3166) (Feature)
+ [Add Serializable docs](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3148) (Documentation Update)
+ [README: add FAQ section](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3178) (Documentation Update)

### Effect CLI
+ [Adds a --log-level built-in option to all commands](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3107) (Feature)
+ [Add Prompt.file to support path-based options in the CLI's --wizard mode](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3153) (Refactor, Feature, Optimization)
+ [Ensure file selector prompts can traverse parent directories](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3167) (Bug Fix)

### Effect Vitest
+ [Refactor vitest](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3122) (Refactor)

### Effect Typeclass
+ [Add Effect and Micro basic instances](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3169) (Feature)
+ [Internal: simplify product implementation](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3177) (Improvement)


## Community highlights

In the last week, we welcomed +50 new Effecters to our [Discord community](https://discord.gg/effect-ts) - we're very excited to have you all on board! 

+[Alessandro Maclaine](https://dev.to/almaclaine) started posting guides about Effect on [dev.to](https://dev.to/). In his latest article he explains how to [use match with Option in Effect](https://dev.to/almaclaine/using-match-with-option-in-effect-1ho9)

+ [Ethan Niser](https://x.com/ethanniser), Effect educator and instructor of the Effect Days Workshop in Vienna, presented a useful Effect use case, showing Schedule flexibility and composability.
<Tweet id="1808266920615202848" />

+ [Christian Schröte](https://x.com/grizzly_codes), creator of [Park-UI](https://park-ui.com/), is rewriting the CLI of his application using Effect and had some positive feedback to share.
<Tweet id="1808215848164704625" />

+ Speaking of, [Maxwell Brown](https://x.com/imax153) gave us a sneak peek of the next version of Effect/CLI, where path-based command-line options will have a file-picker prompt in Wizard Mode.
<Tweet id="1808625323853930923" />

### Content update

+ [Michael Arnaldi](https://x.com/MichaelArnaldi), Author of Effect, joined [JavaScript Jabber](https://x.com/JSJabber) podcast for a special episode about Effect.
<Tweet id="1807814969368691172" />

+ [Tomáš Horáček](https://x.com/heracek), Principal Technology Lead at [Ciklum](https://www.ciklum.com/) made a comprehensive video guide about Effect, analyzing Effect advantages and basic concepts, and how to start creating a basic Effect application and implementing core functions.
<YouTube url="https://www.youtube.com/embed/Mikn2MXPaNg?si=GLxrE0wre1kpLoKc" />

+ The latest episode of [Mattia Manzati](https://twitter.com/MattiaManzati)'s series on [Effect Cluster Integration with Effect RPC](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8WanmCpq_Mw&t=3s) is now available on the [Effect Youtube Channel](https://www.youtube.com/@effect-ts)
<YouTube url="https://www.youtube.com/embed/_TB2gpOSrDo?si=_gnnoazAk5uwOF05" />

+ [Dillon Mulroy](https://twitter.com/dillon_mulroy), Software Engineer @ [Vercel](https://vercel.com), started a new series about [Building a Twitch overlay with TypeScript and EffectTS](https://www.twitch.tv/dmmulroy/videos).
<TwitchPlayerNonInteractive video="2188943846" muted />

## Closing notes

That's all for this week. Thank you for being a vital part of our community. Your feedback is highly valued as we fine-tune this format. Feel free to share your thoughts, and we'll do our best to tailor it to the needs of our community.

_Effect Community Team_
