content/blog/0035-effect-3.5.mdx, before:

---
title: Effect 3.5 (Release)
excerpt: Release post highlighting new additions and changes
date: 2024-07-10
authors:
  - name: Tim Smart
    description: Founding Engineer
    avatar: https://pbs.twimg.com/profile_images/3642301555/77cc6dab66dc94fdd77e503fd6d1c1cf_400x400.jpeg
    twitter: https://twitter.com/tim_smart
---

Effect 3.5.0 has been released! This release includes a number of new features
and improvements. Here's a summary of what's new:

## Better support for Error.cause

If you add a `cause` property to `Data.Error` or `Data.TaggedError`, it will now be properly
forwarded to the `cause` property of the `Error` instance.

```typescript
import { Data } from "effect"

class MyError extends Data.Error<{ cause: Error }> {}
```

If you `Effect.log` a `Cause` containing an error with a `cause` property, it will now be
visible in the log output.

## @effect/sql-d1

The `@effect/sql-d1` package has been released. This package provides `@effect/sql` support
for Cloudflare's D1 database.

## Added RcRef & RcMap

`RcRef` and `RcMap` are new reference counted types that can be used to manage resources.

The wrapped resource will be acquired on the first access and released when no longer in use.

`RcRef` can be used to manage a single resource, and `RcMap` can be used to manage
multiple resources reference by a key.

```typescript
import { Effect, RcMap } from "effect"

Effect.gen(function* () {
  const map = yield* RcMap.make({
    lookup: (key: string) =>
      Effect.acquireRelease(Effect.succeed(`acquired ${key}`), () =>
        Effect.log(`releasing ${key}`),
      )
  })

  // Get "foo" from the map twice, which will only acquire it once
  // It will then be released once the scope closes.
  yield* RcMap.get(map, "foo").pipe(
    Effect.andThen(RcMap.get(map, "foo")),
    Effect.scoped
  )
})
```

## Added Logger.pretty

`Logger.pretty` is a new logger that leverages the features of the `console` APIs to provide a more visually appealing output.

To try it out, provide it to your program:

```typescript
import { Effect, Logger } from "effect"

Effect.log("Hello, World!").pipe(Effect.provide(Logger.pretty))
```

## Add replay option to PubSub

The `replay` option adds a replay buffer in front of the given PubSub. The buffer will
replay the last `n` messages to any new subscriber.

```typescript
Effect.gen(function*() {
  const messages = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]
  const pubsub = yield* PubSub.bounded<number>({ capacity: 16, replay: 3 })
  yield* PubSub.publishAll(pubsub, messages)
  const sub = yield* PubSub.subscribe(pubsub)
  assert.deepStrictEqual(Chunk.toReadonlyArray(yield* Queue.takeAll(sub)), [3, 4, 5])
}))
```

## Added Stream.raceAll

`Stream.raceAll` races the given streams, with the first stream to emit an item declared the
winner. The resulting stream will emit the items from the winning stream.

```typescript
import { Stream, Schedule, Console, Effect } from "effect"

const stream = Stream.raceAll(
  Stream.fromSchedule(Schedule.spaced("1 millis")),
  Stream.fromSchedule(Schedule.spaced("2 millis")),
  Stream.fromSchedule(Schedule.spaced("4 millis"))
).pipe(Stream.take(6), Stream.tap(Console.log))

Effect.runPromise(Stream.runDrain(stream))
// Output only from the first stream, the rest streams are interrupted
// 0
// 1
// 2
// 3
// 4
// 5
```

## Stream type fixes

- `Stream` & `Channel` run* methods now exclude `Scope` from the `R` type.
- Use of `Stream.DynamicTuple` has been replaced with `Types.TupleOf`.
- Use `left` / `right` naming instead of `self` / `that` in `Stream.mergeRight` & `Stream.mergeLeft`.

## Other changes

There were several other smaller changes made. Take a look through the CHANGELOG to see them all: [CHANGELOG](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/blob/main/packages/effect/CHANGELOG.md).

Don't forget to join our [Discord Community](https://discord.gg/effect-ts) to follow the last updates and discuss every tiny detail!

Commit message:

Logger.pretty becoming the default

content/blog/0035-effect-3.5.mdx, after:

---
title: Effect 3.5 (Release)
excerpt: Release post highlighting new additions and changes
date: 2024-07-10
authors:
  - name: Tim Smart
    description: Founding Engineer
    avatar: https://pbs.twimg.com/profile_images/3642301555/77cc6dab66dc94fdd77e503fd6d1c1cf_400x400.jpeg
    twitter: https://twitter.com/tim_smart
---

Effect 3.5.0 has been released! This release includes a number of new features
and improvements. Here's a summary of what's new:

## Better support for Error.cause

If you add a `cause` property to `Data.Error` or `Data.TaggedError`, it will now be properly
forwarded to the `cause` property of the `Error` instance.

```typescript
import { Data } from "effect"

class MyError extends Data.Error<{ cause: Error }> {}
```

If you `Effect.log` a `Cause` containing an error with a `cause` property, it will now be
visible in the log output.

## @effect/sql-d1

The `@effect/sql-d1` package has been released. This package provides `@effect/sql` support
for Cloudflare's D1 database.

## Added RcRef & RcMap

`RcRef` and `RcMap` are new reference counted types that can be used to manage resources.

The wrapped resource will be acquired on the first access and released when no longer in use.

`RcRef` can be used to manage a single resource, and `RcMap` can be used to manage
multiple resources reference by a key.

```typescript
import { Effect, RcMap } from "effect"

Effect.gen(function* () {
  const map = yield* RcMap.make({
    lookup: (key: string) =>
      Effect.acquireRelease(Effect.succeed(`acquired ${key}`), () =>
        Effect.log(`releasing ${key}`),
      )
  })

  // Get "foo" from the map twice, which will only acquire it once
  // It will then be released once the scope closes.
  yield* RcMap.get(map, "foo").pipe(
    Effect.andThen(RcMap.get(map, "foo")),
    Effect.scoped
  )
})
```

## Added Logger.pretty

`Logger.pretty` is a new logger that leverages the features of the `console` APIs to provide a more visually appealing output.

To try it out, provide it to your program:

```typescript
import { Effect, Logger } from "effect"

Effect.log("Hello, World!").pipe(Effect.provide(Logger.pretty))
```

In Effect 4.0, `Logger.pretty` will become default logger.

## Add replay option to PubSub

The `replay` option adds a replay buffer in front of the given PubSub. The buffer will
replay the last `n` messages to any new subscriber.

```typescript
Effect.gen(function*() {
  const messages = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]
  const pubsub = yield* PubSub.bounded<number>({ capacity: 16, replay: 3 })
  yield* PubSub.publishAll(pubsub, messages)
  const sub = yield* PubSub.subscribe(pubsub)
  assert.deepStrictEqual(Chunk.toReadonlyArray(yield* Queue.takeAll(sub)), [3, 4, 5])
}))
```

## Added Stream.raceAll

`Stream.raceAll` races the given streams, with the first stream to emit an item declared the
winner. The resulting stream will emit the items from the winning stream.

```typescript
import { Stream, Schedule, Console, Effect } from "effect"

const stream = Stream.raceAll(
  Stream.fromSchedule(Schedule.spaced("1 millis")),
  Stream.fromSchedule(Schedule.spaced("2 millis")),
  Stream.fromSchedule(Schedule.spaced("4 millis"))
).pipe(Stream.take(6), Stream.tap(Console.log))

Effect.runPromise(Stream.runDrain(stream))
// Output only from the first stream, the rest streams are interrupted
// 0
// 1
// 2
// 3
// 4
// 5
```

## Stream type fixes

- `Stream` & `Channel` run* methods now exclude `Scope` from the `R` type.
- Use of `Stream.DynamicTuple` has been replaced with `Types.TupleOf`.
- Use `left` / `right` naming instead of `self` / `that` in `Stream.mergeRight` & `Stream.mergeLeft`.

## Other changes

There were several other smaller changes made. Take a look through the CHANGELOG to see them all: [CHANGELOG](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/blob/main/packages/effect/CHANGELOG.md).

Don't forget to join our [Discord Community](https://discord.gg/effect-ts) to follow the last updates and discuss every tiny detail!
