content/blog/0036-this-week-in-effect-2024-07-12.mdx, before:

---
title: This Week in Effect - 2024-07-12
excerpt:  Technical updates in Effect. 'Effect, The Missing TypeScript Standard Library' by Tomáš Horáček.
date: 2024-07-12
authors:
  - name: Davide Scognamiglio
    description: Project Manager
    avatar: https://pbs.twimg.com/profile_images/1329959878476111875/evHG8VX6_400x400.jpg
    twitter: https://twitter.com/DadeSkoTV
  - name: Mirela Prifti
    description: Community Manager
    avatar: https://pbs.twimg.com/profile_images/1728403785024770048/frKphayT_400x400.jpg
    twitter: https://twitter.com/mirepri4
  - name: Michael Arnaldi
    description: Chief Executive Officer
    avatar: https://pbs.twimg.com/profile_images/1232338149340319751/Ln9nNWyk_400x400.jpg
    twitter: https://twitter.com/MichaelArnaldi
relatedPosts:
  - this-week-in-effect-2024-07-05
---

Hi Effecters! 

Welcome back to This Week In Effect (**TWIE**), a weekly update to keep you in the loop with all the latest developments in the Effect community and ecosystem.

Effect is a powerful TypeScript library designed to help developers create complex, synchronous, and asynchronous programs. One of the key features that sets Effect apart is how it leverages structured concurrency to provide features such as async cancellation and safe resource management, making it easier to build robust, scalable, and efficient programs.

To get started with Effect, explore our quick-start guide and documentation below.

- [Effect quick-start guide](/docs/quickstart)
- [Effect docs](/docs/introduction)

We want to make it easy for you to find everything you need to fully enjoy your Effect journey and actively engage with the community! In this blog post series, you'll find all the significant developments from the previous week, such as Discord discussions, noteworthy posts, YouTube content, and technical advancements.

**Recent major updates**

- Effect is now API stable with the [Effect 3.0 release](https://effect.website/blog/effect-3.0).
- [Effect 3.4](https://effect.website/blog/effect-3.3) has been released.
- Our [community on Discord](https://discord.gg/effect-ts) reached 3160+ members!
- Published all talks from Effect Days 2024 on the [Effect YouTube channel](https://www.youtube.com/@effect-ts).


## Technology

Here are all the technical changes that occurred last week.

### Effect Core
+ [Refactor TrimEnd & TrimStart](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3181) (Refactor)
+ [Updated the JSDocs for the Stream module by adding examples to key functions](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3204) (Documentation Update)
+ [Allow invalidated Pool items to be reclaimed with usage strategy](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3202) (Feature)
+ [Improve babel build post-processing](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3206) (Bug Fix)
+ [Prevent reclaim of manually invalidated pool items](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3210) (Bug Fix)
+ [Reduce chance of race condition in Micro withConcurrency test](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3211) (Improvement)
+ [Add example to Random.make](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3219/) (Documentation Update)
+ [Fix Logger.pretty on bun](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3220) (Bug Fix)
+ [Add JSDocs for logger-related functions](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3221) (Documentation Update)

### Effect Platform
+ [Remove unnecessary build config](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3207) (Bug Fix)
+ [Improve babel build post-processing](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3206) (Bug Fix)
+ [Simplify /platform http response handling](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3209) (Improvement)
+ [Improve /platform/WorkerError messages](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3223) (Improvement)

### Effect Experimental
+ [Improve babel build post-processing](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3206) (Bug Fix)
+ [Disable lmdb tests in experimental](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3217) (Bug Fix)

### Effect Cluster
+ [Improve babel build post-processing](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3206) (Bug Fix)

### Effect Schema
+ [Add reference to filterEffect in the Zod comparison and fix faq section](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3182) (Documentation Update)
+ [Zod comparison: Add some links and fix typo](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3183) (Documentation Update)
+ [Support Capitalize Uncapitalize filters and schemas](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3192) (Feature)
+ [Add example of customizing the type output of TreeFormatter using annotations](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3193) (Documentation Update)
+ [Add toString to AST.PropertySignature and AST.IndexSignature and fix type display for IndexSignature](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3198) (Bug Fix)
+ [Improve babel build post-processing](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3206) (Bug Fix)

### Effect CLI
+ [Improve babel build post-processing](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3206) (Bug Fix)

### Effect Vitest
+ [Improve babel build post-processing](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3206) (Bug Fix)

### Effect Typeclass
+ [Improve babel build post-processing](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3206) (Bug Fix)

### Effect Opentelemetry
+ [Improve babel build post-processing](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3206) (Bug Fix)

### Effect Printer
+ [Improve babel build post-processing](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3206) (Bug Fix)

### Effect RPC
+ [Improve babel build post-processing](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3206) (Bug Fix)
+ [Add basic docs to rpc](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3214) (Documentation Update)

### Effect SQL
+ [Improve babel build post-processing](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3206) (Bug Fix)

## Community highlights

In the last week, we welcomed +50 new Effecters to our [Discord community](https://discord.gg/effect-ts) - we're very excited to have you all on board! 

+ [Alessandro Maclaine](https://dev.to/almaclaine) who recently started posting about Effect on [dev.to](https://dev.to/), wrote an article explaining how to [use match with Option in Effect](https://dev.to/almaclaine/using-match-with-option-in-effect-1ho9).

+ [Ethan Niser](https://x.com/ethanniser), Effect educator and instructor at the Effect Days workshop in Vienna, shared a use case where he found Effect to be very useful. Check out the post below for more details.
<Tweet id="1808266920615202848" />

+ [Christian Schröte](https://x.com/grizzly_codes), creator of [Park-UI](https://park-ui.com/), is rewriting the CLI of his application using Effect and shared some positive feedback on X (Twitter).
<Tweet id="1808215848164704625" />

+ Speaking of, [Maxwell Brown](https://x.com/imax153) gave us a sneak peek of the next version of Effect/CLI, where path-based command-line options will have a file-picker prompt in Wizard Mode.
<Tweet id="1808625323853930923" />

### Content update

+ [Michael Arnaldi](https://x.com/MichaelArnaldi), creator of Effect, joined the [JavaScript Jabber](https://x.com/JSJabber) podcast for a special episode about Effect.
<Tweet id="1807814969368691172" />

+ [Tomáš Horáček](https://x.com/heracek), Principal Technology Lead at [Ciklum](https://www.ciklum.com/) gave a talk about Effect, where he showed the benefits of using Effect in creating reliable, reusable, and maintainable applications, including how to start creating a basic Effect application and implementing its core functions.
<YouTube url="https://www.youtube.com/embed/Mikn2MXPaNg?si=GLxrE0wre1kpLoKc" />

+ The latest episode of [Mattia Manzati](https://twitter.com/MattiaManzati)'s series on [Effect Cluster Integration with Effect RPC](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8WanmCpq_Mw&t=3s) is now available on the [Effect Youtube Channel](https://www.youtube.com/@effect-ts)
<YouTube url="https://www.youtube.com/embed/_TB2gpOSrDo?si=_gnnoazAk5uwOF05" />

+ [Dillon Mulroy](https://twitter.com/dillon_mulroy), Software Engineer @ [Vercel](https://vercel.com), went live on Twitch again with his series on [Building a Twitch overlay with TypeScript and EffectTS](https://www.twitch.tv/dmmulroy/videos).
<TwitchPlayerNonInteractive video="2188943846" />

## Closing notes

That's all for this week. Thank you for being a vital part of our community. Your feedback is highly valued as we fine-tune this format. Feel free to share your thoughts, and we'll do our best to tailor it to the needs of our community.

_Effect Community Team_

Commit message:

updated tech and community sections and added related post on twie_05_07_2024

content/blog/0036-this-week-in-effect-2024-07-12.mdx, after:

---
title: This Week in Effect - 2024-07-12
excerpt:  Effect 3.5 release. 'Effect, A Functional Foundation For TypeScript' by Michael Arnaldi.
date: 2024-07-12
authors:
  - name: Davide Scognamiglio
    description: Project Manager
    avatar: https://pbs.twimg.com/profile_images/1329959878476111875/evHG8VX6_400x400.jpg
    twitter: https://twitter.com/DadeSkoTV
  - name: Mirela Prifti
    description: Community Manager
    avatar: https://pbs.twimg.com/profile_images/1728403785024770048/frKphayT_400x400.jpg
    twitter: https://twitter.com/mirepri4
  - name: Michael Arnaldi
    description: Chief Executive Officer
    avatar: https://pbs.twimg.com/profile_images/1232338149340319751/Ln9nNWyk_400x400.jpg
    twitter: https://twitter.com/MichaelArnaldi
relatedPosts:
  - this-week-in-effect-2024-07-05
---

Hi Effecters! 

Welcome back to This Week In Effect (**TWIE**), a weekly update to keep you in the loop with all the latest developments in the Effect community and ecosystem.

Effect is a powerful TypeScript library designed to help developers create complex, synchronous, and asynchronous programs. One of the key features that sets Effect apart is how it leverages structured concurrency to provide features such as async cancellation and safe resource management, making it easier to build robust, scalable, and efficient programs.

To get started with Effect, explore our quick-start guide and documentation below.

- [Effect quick-start guide](/docs/quickstart)
- [Effect docs](/docs/introduction)

We want to make it easy for you to find everything you need to fully enjoy your Effect journey and actively engage with the community! In this blog post series, you'll find all the significant developments from the previous week, such as Discord discussions, noteworthy posts, YouTube content, and technical advancements.

**Recent major updates**

- Effect is now API stable with the [Effect 3.0 release](https://effect.website/blog/effect-3.0).
- [Effect 3.5](https://effect.website/blog/effect-3.5) has been released.
- Our [community on Discord](https://discord.gg/effect-ts) reached 3200+ members!
- Published all talks from Effect Days 2024 on the [Effect YouTube channel](https://www.youtube.com/@effect-ts).


## Technology

[Effect 3.5](https://effect.website/blog/effect-3.5) has been released.

Here are all the technical changes that occurred last week (note that changes included in the Effect 3.5 release will not be listed).

### Effect Core
+ [Refactor TrimEnd & TrimStart](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3181) (Refactor)
+ [Updated the JSDocs for the Stream module by adding examples to key functions](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3204) (Documentation Update)
+ [Allow invalidated Pool items to be reclaimed with usage strategy](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3202) (Feature)
+ [Improve babel build post-processing](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3206) (Bug Fix)
+ [Prevent reclaim of manually invalidated pool items](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3210) (Bug Fix)
+ [Reduce chance of race condition in Micro withConcurrency test](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3211) (Improvement)
+ [Add example to Random.make](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3219/) (Documentation Update)
+ [Fix Logger.pretty on bun](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3220) (Bug Fix)
+ [Add JSDocs for logger-related functions](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3221) (Documentation Update)
+ [Render a more helpful error message in Effect.timeout](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3228) (Optimization)
+ [Improve safari support for Logger.pretty](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3235) (Improvement)
+ [Set Logger.pretty message color to deepskyblue on browsers](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3236) (Improvement)
+ [Fix process .isTTY detection](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3240) (Bug Fix)
+ [Align Stream.run public function signatures](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3238) (Bug Fix)
+ [Support heterogenous argument in Option.firstSomeOf](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3230) (Bug Fix)

### Effect Platform
+ [Remove unnecessary build config](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3207) (Bug Fix)
+ [Improve babel build post-processing](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3206) (Bug Fix)
+ [Simplify /platform http response handling](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3209) (Improvement)
+ [Improve /platform/WorkerError messages](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3223) (Improvement)
+ [Ensure interrupts are handled in WorkerRunner](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3241) (Bug Fix)

### Effect Experimental
+ [Improve babel build post-processing](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3206) (Bug Fix)
+ [Disable lmdb tests in experimental](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3217) (Bug Fix)
+ [Revert PrimaryKey fallback in /experimental Persistence](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3233) (Bug Fix)

### Effect Cluster
+ [Improve babel build post-processing](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3206) (Bug Fix)

### Effect Schema
+ [Add reference to filterEffect in the Zod comparison and fix faq section](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3182) (Documentation Update)
+ [Zod comparison: Add some links and fix typo](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3183) (Documentation Update)
+ [Support Capitalize Uncapitalize filters and schemas](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3192) (Feature)
+ [Add example of customizing the type output of TreeFormatter using annotations](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3193) (Documentation Update)
+ [Add toString to AST.PropertySignature and AST.IndexSignature and fix type display for IndexSignature](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3198) (Bug Fix)
+ [Improve babel build post-processing](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3206) (Bug Fix)

### Effect CLI
+ [Improve babel build post-processing](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3206) (Bug Fix)

### Effect Vitest
+ [Improve babel build post-processing](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3206) (Bug Fix)

### Effect Typeclass
+ [Improve babel build post-processing](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3206) (Bug Fix)

### Effect Opentelemetry
+ [Improve babel build post-processing](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3206) (Bug Fix)

### Effect Printer
+ [Improve babel build post-processing](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3206) (Bug Fix)

### Effect RPC
+ [Improve babel build post-processing](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3206) (Bug Fix)
+ [Add basic docs to rpc](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3214) (Documentation Update)

### Effect SQL
+ [Improve babel build post-processing](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3206) (Bug Fix)

### General Chores
+ [Add issue_comment to release-queue workflow](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3242)

## Community highlights

In the last week, we welcomed +40 new Effecters to our [Discord community](https://discord.gg/effect-ts) - we're very excited to have you all on board! 

+ [Johannes Schickling](https://x.com/schickling), Effect DX and Power User, had been guest on the [Happy Path Programming Podcast](https://podcasters.spotify.com/pod/show/happypathprogramming/episodes/101-Effects-and-Local-First-with-Johannes-Schickling-e2lkhkj) and talked about Effect and Local-First development.
<Tweet id="1810351642874978448" />

+ [Daniel Steigerwald](https://x.com/steida), founder of [Evolu](https://www.evolu.dev) will be giving a talk about the use of Effect in his application @ the [Frontkon 2024](https://www.frontkon.cz) in Prague on October, the 9th.
<Tweet id="1805126236529627137" />

+ [Sandro Maglione](https://x.com/SandroMaglione), Effect Power User and TypeScript Educator, is working on his **Effect getting started step by step course** and he's calling all Effect beginners to review the course and give feedback before going live. We encourage all interested users to reach out to him on X.
<Tweet id="1811056532823445889" />

### Content update

+ [Michael Arnaldi](https://x.com/MichaelArnaldi)'s talk @ [LambdaConf 2024](https://x.com/lambda_conf), "Effect: A Functional Foundation For TypeScript", is now available on [LambdaConf YouTube channel](https://www.youtube.com/@LambdaConf). In this talk, Michael delves into how to use Effect and what you can get "out-of-the-box" from its ecosystem with features such as native open-telemetry, schema validation, structured concurrency, and much more.
<YouTube url="https://www.youtube.com/embed/BHuY6w9ed5o?si=c4jVrsQM35WeqwVd" />

+ [Dillon Mulroy](https://twitter.com/dillon_mulroy), Software Engineer @ [Vercel](https://vercel.com), kept on with his series on [Building a Twitch overlay with TypeScript and EffectTS](https://www.twitch.tv/dmmulroy/videos). Here's episode 2:
<TwitchPlayerNonInteractive video="2189757748" />

+ and episode 3:
<TwitchPlayerNonInteractive video="2192282409" />

## Closing notes

That's all for this week. Thank you for being a vital part of our community. Your feedback is highly valued as we fine-tune this format. Feel free to share your thoughts, and we'll do our best to tailor it to the needs of our community.

_Effect Community Team_
