content/blog/0037-this-week-in-effect-2024-07-19.mdx, before:

---
title: This Week in Effect - 2024-07-19
excerpt:  Effect 3.5 release. 'Effect, A Functional Foundation For TypeScript' by Michael Arnaldi.
date: 2024-07-19
authors:
  - name: Davide Scognamiglio
    description: Project Manager
    avatar: https://pbs.twimg.com/profile_images/1329959878476111875/evHG8VX6_400x400.jpg
    twitter: https://twitter.com/DadeSkoTV
  - name: Mirela Prifti
    description: Community Manager
    avatar: https://pbs.twimg.com/profile_images/1728403785024770048/frKphayT_400x400.jpg
    twitter: https://twitter.com/mirepri4
  - name: Michael Arnaldi
    description: Chief Executive Officer
    avatar: https://pbs.twimg.com/profile_images/1232338149340319751/Ln9nNWyk_400x400.jpg
    twitter: https://twitter.com/MichaelArnaldi
relatedPosts:
  - this-week-in-effect-2024-07-12
---

Hi Effecters! 

Welcome back to This Week In Effect (**TWIE**), a weekly update to keep you in the loop with all the latest developments in the Effect community and ecosystem.

Effect is a powerful TypeScript library that helps developers create complex, synchronous, and asynchronous programs. One of the key features that sets Effect apart is how it leverages structured concurrency to provide features such as async cancellation and safe resource management, making it easier to build robust, scalable, and efficient programs.

Get started with Effect with our quick-start guide and documentation below:

- [Effect quick-start guide](/docs/quickstart)
- [Effect docs](/docs/introduction)

We want to make it easy for you to find everything you need to fully enjoy your Effect journey and actively engage with the community! In this blog post series, you'll find all the significant developments from the previous week, such as Discord discussions, noteworthy posts, YouTube content, and technical advancements.

**Recent major updates**

- Effect is now API stable with the [Effect 3.0 release](https://effect.website/blog/effect-3.0).
- [Effect 3.5](https://effect.website/blog/effect-3.5) has been released.
- Our [community on Discord](https://discord.gg/effect-ts) reached 3200+ members!
- Published all talks from Effect Days 2024 on the [Effect YouTube channel](https://www.youtube.com/@effect-ts).


## Technology

Here are all the technical changes that occurred last week.

### Effect Core
+ [Render nested causes in Cause.pretty](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3246) (Improvement)
+ [If performance.timeOrigin is 0, use performance.now() directly in Clock](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3247) (Improvement)
+ [Add support for Refinements to Predicate.or](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3250) (Feature)
+ [Update dependencies](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3253) (Improvement)
+ [Use "unbounded" buffer for Stream.fromEventListener](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3266) (Improvement)
+ [Changed Stream.groupByKey JSDoc category from utils to grouping](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3289) (Refactor)
+ [Correctly exclude symbols from Record.keys](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3294) (Bug Fix)
+ [Fix YieldableError rendering on bun](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3295) (Bug Fix)
+ [Forbid usage of property "name" in Effect.Tag](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3288) (Bug Fix)
+ [Implement Struct.keys as a typed alternative to Object.keys](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3282) (Feature, next-minor)

### Effect SQL
+ [Update dependencies](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3253) (Improvement)
+ [Replace /platform RefailError with use of the "cause" property](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3260) (Improvement)
+ [Sql-kysely: fix error handling in internal executeCommit](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3271) (Bug Fix, next-minor)

### Effect Platform
+ [Update dependencies](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3253) (Improvement)
+ [Refactor & simplify /platform backing workers](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3255) (Refactor)
+ [Replace /platform RefailError with use of the "cause" property](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3260) (Improvement)
+ [Add NodeHttpServerRequest.toServerResponse for accessing the raw node response](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3265) (Feature)
+ [Allow creating browser WorkerRunner from a MessagePort](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3263) (Feature)
+ [Ensure /platform HttpApp.toWebHandler runs Stream's with the current runtime](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3278) (Bug Fix)
+ [Remove cjs /platform dependencies](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3281) (Improvement)

### Effect Experimental
+ [Update dependencies](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3253) (Improvement)
+ [Replace /platform RefailError with use of the "cause" property](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3260) (Improvement)
+ [Allow ignoring empty lines when unpacking Ndjson](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3259) (Feature)

### Effect Cluster
+ [Fix: typo in DurableExecutionJournal.ts](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3174) (Bug Fix)
+ [Update dependencies](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3253) (Improvement)

### Effect Schema
+ [Update dependencies](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3253) (Improvement)
+ [Align schema readme Schema.message -> Schema.annotations](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3261) (Documentation Update)
+ [Fix: Correct Handling of JSON Schema Annotations in Refinements](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3284) (Bug Fix)
+ [JSON Schema: change default behavior for property signatures containing undefined](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3287) (Bug Fix)
+ [Remove type-level error message from optional signature](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3291) (Bug Fix)
+ [Add "Naming Conventions" doc section](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3298) (Documentation Update)
+ [Move Arbitrary / Pretty / JSON Schema / Equivalences to top level sections](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3300) (Documentation Update)

### Effect RPC
+ [Improve transformation accuracy in Router.toHandler](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3251) (Improvement)

### Effect Vitest
+ [Update dependencies](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3253) (Improvement)

### Effect CLI
+ [Update dependencies](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3253) (Improvement)
+ [Feat: allow equals sign in aliased parameter values.](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2755) (Feature)

### Effect Opentelemetry
+ [Force flush otel provider before calling shutdown](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3254) (Bug Fix)

### General Chores
+ [Disable bun test suite](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3264)
+ [Use pkg.pr.new for snapshots](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3269) (Optimization)
+ [Do not use compact mode as it is broken](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3273) (Bug Fix)
+ [Make sure snapshot URLs are split on the last @ character](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3274) (Bug Fix)


## Community highlights

In the last week, we welcomed +40 new Effecters to our [Discord community](https://discord.gg/effect-ts) - we're very excited to have you all on board! 

+ [Johannes Schickling](https://x.com/schickling), Effect DX & Power User, appeared on a podcast episode for [Happy Path Programming](https://podcasters.spotify.com/pod/show/happypathprogramming/episodes/101-Effects-and-Local-First-with-Johannes-Schickling-e2lkhkj) where he talked about Effect and local-first development. Happy Path Programming is a podcast run by James Ward and Bruce Eckel.
<Tweet id="1810351642874978448" />

+ [Daniel Steigerwald](https://x.com/steida), founder of [Evolu](https://www.evolu.dev), will be giving a talk about the use of Effect in his application at the [Frontkon 2024](https://www.frontkon.cz) in Prague on October, the 9th. Evolu is a local-first platform designed for privacy, ease of use, and no vendor lock-in.
<Tweet id="1805126236529627137" />

### Content update

+ [Michael Arnaldi](https://x.com/MichaelArnaldi)'s talk at the [LambdaConf 2024](https://x.com/lambda_conf) is now available on [LambdaConf YouTube channel](https://www.youtube.com/@LambdaConf): "Effect: A ~~functional~~ foundation for TypeScript". In this talk, Michael delves into how to use Effect and what you can get "out-of-the-box" from its ecosystem with features such as native open-telemetry, schema validation, structured concurrency, and much more.
<YouTube url="https://www.youtube.com/embed/BHuY6w9ed5o?si=c4jVrsQM35WeqwVd" />

+ [Dillon Mulroy](https://twitter.com/dillon_mulroy), Software Engineer at [Vercel](https://vercel.com), was live streaming again on **Building a Twitch overlay with TypeScript and EffectTS**. Watch the two episodes below:
<TwitchPlayerNonInteractive video="2189757748" />
---
<TwitchPlayerNonInteractive video="2192282409" />

## Closing notes

That's all for this week. Thank you for being a vital part of our community. Your feedback is highly valued as we fine-tune this format. Feel free to share your thoughts, and we'll do our best to tailor it to the needs of our community.

_Effect Community Team_

Commit message:

Updated tech and community sections, updated metadata and added related post on twie_12_07_2024

content/blog/0037-this-week-in-effect-2024-07-19.mdx, after:

---
title: This Week in Effect - 2024-07-19
excerpt:  Technical Updates in Effect. 'Reimagining Contentlayer' by Michael Arnaldi and Maxwell Brown.
date: 2024-07-19
authors:
  - name: Davide Scognamiglio
    description: Project Manager
    avatar: https://pbs.twimg.com/profile_images/1329959878476111875/evHG8VX6_400x400.jpg
    twitter: https://twitter.com/DadeSkoTV
  - name: Mirela Prifti
    description: Community Manager
    avatar: https://pbs.twimg.com/profile_images/1728403785024770048/frKphayT_400x400.jpg
    twitter: https://twitter.com/mirepri4
  - name: Michael Arnaldi
    description: Chief Executive Officer
    avatar: https://pbs.twimg.com/profile_images/1232338149340319751/Ln9nNWyk_400x400.jpg
    twitter: https://twitter.com/MichaelArnaldi
relatedPosts:
  - this-week-in-effect-2024-07-12
---

Hi Effecters! 

Welcome back to This Week In Effect (**TWIE**), a weekly update to keep you in the loop with all the latest developments in the Effect community and ecosystem.

Effect is a powerful TypeScript library that helps developers create complex, synchronous, and asynchronous programs. One of the key features that sets Effect apart is how it leverages structured concurrency to provide features such as async cancellation and safe resource management, making it easier to build robust, scalable, and efficient programs.

Get started with Effect with our quick-start guide and documentation below:

- [Effect quick-start guide](/docs/quickstart)
- [Effect docs](/docs/introduction)

We want to make it easy for you to find everything you need to fully enjoy your Effect journey and actively engage with the community! In this blog post series, you'll find all the significant developments from the previous week, such as Discord discussions, noteworthy posts, YouTube content, and technical advancements.

**Recent major updates**

- Effect is now API stable with the [Effect 3.0 release](https://effect.website/blog/effect-3.0).
- [Effect 3.5](https://effect.website/blog/effect-3.5) has been released.
- Our [community on Discord](https://discord.gg/effect-ts) reached 3240+ members!
- Published all talks from Effect Days 2024 on the [Effect YouTube channel](https://www.youtube.com/@effect-ts).


## Technology

Here are all the technical changes that occurred last week.

### Effect Core
+ [Render nested causes in Cause.pretty](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3246) (Improvement)
+ [If performance.timeOrigin is 0, use performance.now() directly in Clock](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3247) (Improvement)
+ [Add support for Refinements to Predicate.or](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3250) (Feature)
+ [Update dependencies](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3253) (Improvement)
+ [Use "unbounded" buffer for Stream.fromEventListener](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3266) (Improvement)
+ [Changed Stream.groupByKey JSDoc category from utils to grouping](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3289) (Refactor)
+ [Correctly exclude symbols from Record.keys](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3294) (Bug Fix)
+ [Fix YieldableError rendering on bun](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3295) (Bug Fix)
+ [Forbid usage of property "name" in Effect.Tag](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3288) (Bug Fix)
+ [Implement Struct.keys as a typed alternative to Object.keys](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3282) (Feature, next-minor)
+ [Feat(Stream): add Stream.onStart api](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3302) (Feature, next-minor)
+ [Add Stream.asyncPush api](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3277) (Feature, next-minor)
+ [Feat(Stream): onEnd](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3303) (Feature, next-minor)

### Effect SQL
+ [Update dependencies](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3253) (Improvement)
+ [Replace /platform RefailError with use of the "cause" property](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3260) (Improvement)
+ [Sql-kysely: fix error handling in internal executeCommit](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3271) (Bug Fix, next-minor)

### Effect Platform
+ [Update dependencies](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3253) (Improvement)
+ [Refactor & simplify /platform backing workers](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3255) (Refactor)
+ [Replace /platform RefailError with use of the "cause" property](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3260) (Improvement)
+ [Add NodeHttpServerRequest.toServerResponse for accessing the raw node response](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3265) (Feature)
+ [Allow creating browser WorkerRunner from a MessagePort](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3263) (Feature)
+ [Ensure /platform HttpApp.toWebHandler runs Stream's with the current runtime](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3278) (Bug Fix)
+ [Remove cjs /platform dependencies](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3281) (Improvement)

### Effect Experimental
+ [Update dependencies](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3253) (Improvement)
+ [Replace /platform RefailError with use of the "cause" property](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3260) (Improvement)
+ [Allow ignoring empty lines when unpacking Ndjson](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3259) (Feature)

### Effect Cluster
+ [Fix: typo in DurableExecutionJournal.ts](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3174) (Bug Fix)
+ [Update dependencies](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3253) (Improvement)

### Effect Schema
+ [Update dependencies](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3253) (Improvement)
+ [Align schema readme Schema.message -> Schema.annotations](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3261) (Documentation Update)
+ [Fix: Correct Handling of JSON Schema Annotations in Refinements](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3284) (Bug Fix)
+ [JSON Schema: change default behavior for property signatures containing undefined](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3287) (Bug Fix)
+ [Remove type-level error message from optional signature](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3291) (Bug Fix)
+ [Add "Naming Conventions" doc section](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3298) (Documentation Update)
+ [Move Arbitrary / Pretty / JSON Schema / Equivalences to top level sections](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3300) (Documentation Update)

### Effect RPC
+ [Improve transformation accuracy in Router.toHandler](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3251) (Improvement)

### Effect Vitest
+ [Update dependencies](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3253) (Improvement)

### Effect CLI
+ [Update dependencies](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3253) (Improvement)
+ [Feat: allow equals sign in aliased parameter values.](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/2755) (Feature)

### Effect Opentelemetry
+ [Force flush otel provider before calling shutdown](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3254) (Bug Fix)

### General Chores
+ [Disable bun test suite](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3264)
+ [Use pkg.pr.new for snapshots](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3269) (Optimization)
+ [Do not use compact mode as it is broken](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3273) (Bug Fix)
+ [Make sure snapshot URLs are split on the last @ character](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3274) (Bug Fix)


## Community highlights

In the last week, we welcomed +40 new Effecters to our [Discord community](https://discord.gg/effect-ts) - we're very excited to have you all on board! 

+ [Ecyrbe](https://x.com/ecyrbedev), Tech Lead @ [Zodios](https://www.zodios.org), joined the Effect core team and will bring his experience to further improve the SQL subset packages. We are delighted to welcome him to our team and wish him a journey filled with success and significant achievements!
<Tweet id="1812428828305727774" />

+ We are proud of our team's growth and the many talented individuals it continues to attract, and we fully align with [Texoport](https://x.com/texoport__)'s thoughts:
<Tweet id="1812468384388325400" />

+ A heartfelt thank you to [Günther Brunner](https://x.com/gunta85) for pioneering the integration between the Effect and [Hono](https://hono.dev/) ecosystems. Thanks to [this PR](https://github.com/honojs/middleware/tree/main/packages/effect-validator), Hono now supports a new Effect/Schema validation middleware.
<Tweet id="1813170312181391402" />

### Content update

+ [Michael Arnaldi](https://x.com/MichaelArnaldi) and [Maxwell Brown](https://x.com/imax153) were live on Wednesday, with a special **Reimagining Contentlayer** stream, where they showed the latest Effect superpowers. The live stream is already available on [Twitch](https://www.twitch.tv/videos/2200003412) and will be coming soon on the [Effect YouTube Channel](https://www.youtube.com/@effect-ts).
<Tweet id="1813577116807840012" />

## Closing notes

That's all for this week. Thank you for being a vital part of our community. Your feedback is highly valued as we fine-tune this format. Feel free to share your thoughts, and we'll do our best to tailor it to the needs of our community.

_Effect Community Team_
