content/blog/0039-this-week-in-effect-2024-07-26.mdx, before:

---
title: This Week in Effect - 2024-07-26
excerpt:  Technical Updates in Effect. Reimagining Contentlayer by Michael Arnaldi and Maxwell Brown.
date: 2024-07-16
authors:
  - name: Davide Scognamiglio
    description: Project Manager
    avatar: https://pbs.twimg.com/profile_images/1329959878476111875/evHG8VX6_400x400.jpg
    twitter: https://twitter.com/DadeSkoTV
  - name: Mirela Prifti
    description: Community Manager
    avatar: https://pbs.twimg.com/profile_images/1728403785024770048/frKphayT_400x400.jpg
    twitter: https://twitter.com/mirepri4
  - name: Michael Arnaldi
    description: Chief Executive Officer
    avatar: https://pbs.twimg.com/profile_images/1232338149340319751/Ln9nNWyk_400x400.jpg
    twitter: https://twitter.com/MichaelArnaldi
relatedPosts:
  - this-week-in-effect-2024-07-19
---

Hi Effecters! 

Welcome back to This Week In Effect (**TWIE**) – a weekly update to keep you in the loop with all the latest developments in the Effect community and ecosystem.

Effect is a powerful TypeScript library that helps developers create complex, synchronous, and asynchronous programs. One of the key features that sets Effect apart is how it leverages structured concurrency to provide features such as async cancellation and safe resource management, making it easier to build robust, scalable, and efficient programs.

Get started with Effect with our quick-start guide and documentation below:

- [Effect quick-start guide](/docs/quickstart)
- [Effect docs](/docs/introduction)

Recent major updates:

- Effect is API stable with the [Effect 3.0 release](https://effect.website/blog/effect-3.0).
- [Effect 3.5](https://effect.website/blog/effect-3.5) has been released.
- Our [community on Discord](https://discord.gg/effect-ts) reached 3240+ members!
- All talks from Effect Days 2024 are available on the [Effect YouTube channel](https://www.youtube.com/@effect-ts).


## Technology

Here are all the technical changes that occurred last week.

### Effect Core
+ [Remove link to non existing API](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3334) (Documentation Update)

### Effect SQL


### Effect Platform
+ [Fixed search params related function signatures](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3339) (Bug Fix)

### Effect Experimental
+ [Ensure the DevTools client flushes requests on interrupt](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3325) (Bug Fix, Optimization)

### Effect Cluster


### Effect Schema
+ [Remove incorrect static override type annotations in class definitions](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3311) (Bug Fix)
+ [Update JSON Schema guide](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3313) (Documentation Update)
+ [Schema next minor](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3227) (Improvement)
+ [Fix schema benchmarks](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3328) (Bug Fix)
+ [Expose success and failure schemas on TaggedRequestClass interface](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3333) (Improvement)

### Effect RPC
+ [Schema next minor](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3227) (Improvement)

### Effect Vitest
+ [Add vitest skipIf](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3319) (Feature)

### Effect CLI
+ [Support record argument in Prompt.all](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3329) (Feature)
+ [Improve the JSDoc for Prompt.all](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3332) (Documentation Update)

### Effect Opentelemetry


### General Chores
+ [Add patch for babel-plugin-annotate-pure-calls](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3310)
+ [Update eslint plugin](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3312)
+ [Change /snapshot output](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3316)
+ [Fix /snapshot comment output](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3317)
+ [Publish snapshots on every pull request](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3320) (Optimization)
+ [Fix the snapshot action](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3321) (Bug Fix)
+ [Only allow snapshots to run on pull requests](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3324) (Bug Fix)
+ [Remove push trigger from snapshot workflow](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3342) (Bug Fix)


## Community highlights

In the last week, we welcomed +40 new Effecters to our [Discord community](https://discord.gg/effect-ts) - we're very excited to have you all on board! 

+ [Ecyrbe](https://x.com/ecyrbedev), Tech Lead and creator of [Zodios](https://www.zodios.org), joined the Effect core team and will bring his experience to further improve the SQL subset packages.
<Tweet id="1812428828305727774" />

+ We are proud of our team's growth and the many talented individuals it continues to attract, and we're happy to see it doesn't go unnoticed. :)
<Tweet id="1812468384388325400" />

+ Hono gets a new [Effect Schema Validator](https://github.com/honojs/middleware/tree/main/packages/effect-validator) middleware thanks to the work of Günther Brunner. Günther first introduced the Effect Schema PR at the Hono conference in June 2024.
<Tweet id="1813170312181391402" />

## Effect content update

+ Michael Arnaldi and Maxwell Brown went live on Wednesday with **Reimagining Contentlayer** showing the latest Effect superpowers. The video will be available soon on the [Effect YouTube Channel](https://www.youtube.com/@effect-ts). In the meantime, you can watch it on [Mike's Twitch](https://www.twitch.tv/videos/2200003412).
<Tweet id="1813577116807840012" />

## Closing notes

That's all for this week. Thank you for being a vital part of our community. Your feedback is highly valued as we fine-tune this format. Feel free to share your thoughts, and we'll do our best to tailor it to the needs of our community.

_Effect Community Team_

Commit message:

updated tech and community sections and added related post to twie_19_07_2024

content/blog/0039-this-week-in-effect-2024-07-26.mdx, after:

---
title: This Week in Effect - 2024-07-26
excerpt:  Effect Schema 0.69 release. Technical Updates in Effect. 'What is Concurrency? And how can Structured Concurrency make it easier?' by Ethan Niser. 'Reimagining Contentlayer' ep. 2 by Michael Arnaldi and Maxwell Brown. 
date: 2024-07-26
authors:
  - name: Davide Scognamiglio
    description: Project Manager
    avatar: https://pbs.twimg.com/profile_images/1329959878476111875/evHG8VX6_400x400.jpg
    twitter: https://twitter.com/DadeSkoTV
  - name: Mirela Prifti
    description: Community Manager
    avatar: https://pbs.twimg.com/profile_images/1728403785024770048/frKphayT_400x400.jpg
    twitter: https://twitter.com/mirepri4
  - name: Michael Arnaldi
    description: Chief Executive Officer
    avatar: https://pbs.twimg.com/profile_images/1232338149340319751/Ln9nNWyk_400x400.jpg
    twitter: https://twitter.com/MichaelArnaldi
relatedPosts:
  - this-week-in-effect-2024-07-19
---

Hi Effecters! 

Welcome back to This Week In Effect (**TWIE**) – a weekly update to keep you in the loop with all the latest developments in the Effect community and ecosystem.

Effect is a powerful TypeScript library that helps developers create complex, synchronous, and asynchronous programs. One of the key features that sets Effect apart is how it leverages structured concurrency to provide features such as async cancellation and safe resource management, making it easier to build robust, scalable, and efficient programs.

Get started with Effect with our quick-start guide and documentation below:

- [Effect quick-start guide](/docs/quickstart)
- [Effect docs](/docs/introduction)

Recent major updates:

- Effect is API stable with the [Effect 3.0 release](https://effect.website/blog/effect-3.0).
- [Effect 3.5](https://effect.website/blog/effect-3.5) has been released.
- Our [community on Discord](https://discord.gg/effect-ts) reached 3280+ members!
- All talks from Effect Days 2024 are available on the [Effect YouTube channel](https://www.youtube.com/@effect-ts).


## Technology

[Effect Schema 0.69](https://effect.website/blog/schema-release-0.69) has been released.
<Tweet id="1815769005619098053" />

Here are all the technical changes that occurred last week.

### Effect Core
+ [Remove link to non existing API](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3334) (Documentation Update)
+ [Fix typo propety to property](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3345) (Bug Fix)
+ [Ensure all Data.Error arguments are preserved in .toJSON](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3349) (Bug Fix)
+ [Fix Hash.number not returning unique values](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3355) (Bug Fix)
+ [Adjusted various function signatures to return Array](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3340) (Bug fix, next minor)

### Effect Platform
+ [Fixed search params related function signatures](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3339) (Bug Fix)
+ [Adjusted various function signatures to return Array](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3340) (Bug fix, next minor)

### Effect Experimental
+ [Ensure the DevTools client flushes requests on interrupt](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3325) (Bug Fix, Optimization)

### Effect Schema
+ [Remove incorrect static override type annotations in class definitions](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3311) (Bug Fix)
+ [Update JSON Schema guide](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3313) (Documentation Update)
+ [Schema next minor](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3227) (Improvement)
+ [Fix schema benchmarks](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3328) (Bug Fix)
+ [Expose success and failure schemas on TaggedRequestClass interface](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3333) (Improvement)
+ [Improve annotation retrieval from Class APIs](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3357) (Improvement)
+ [Make List.Cons extend NonEmptyIterable](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3350) (Feature, next-minor)
+ [Add Random.choice](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3314) (Feature, next-minor)

### Effect RPC
+ [Schema next minor](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3227) (Improvement)
+ [Adjusted various function signatures to return Array](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3340) (Bug fix, next minor)

### Effect Vitest
+ [Add vitest skipIf](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3319) (Feature)

### Effect CLI
+ [Support record argument in Prompt.all](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3329) (Feature)
+ [Improve the JSDoc for Prompt.all](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3332) (Documentation Update)
+ [Adjusted various function signatures to return Array](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3340) (Bug fix, next minor)

### General Chores
+ [Add patch for babel-plugin-annotate-pure-calls](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3310)
+ [Update eslint plugin](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3312)
+ [Change /snapshot output](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3316)
+ [Fix /snapshot comment output](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3317)
+ [Publish snapshots on every pull request](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3320) (Optimization)
+ [Fix the snapshot action](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3321) (Bug Fix)
+ [Only allow snapshots to run on pull requests](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3324) (Bug Fix)
+ [Remove push trigger from snapshot workflow](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3342) (Bug Fix)
+ [Remove snapshot comment](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3351) (Bug Fix)


## Community highlights

In the last week, we welcomed +40 new Effecters to our [Discord community](https://discord.gg/effect-ts) - we're very excited to have you all on board! 

[Stephen Bluck](https://x.com/whatthebluck), a long-time Effect community member, shared the latest project powered by Effect he worked on. With the [IYK team](https://t.co/4aAdUSMm3M), they debeloped Glimmers, an NFC-enabled sticker that turns any object into a private photo journal.
<Tweet id="1816209112255934617" />

## Effect content update

+ The second episode of Michael Arnaldi's and Maxwell Brown's series **Reimagining Contentlayer**, was aired on Wednesday. 
<Tweet id="1816112584484913397" />

+ You can watch it on [Mike's Twitch](https://www.twitch.tv/mikearnaldi/video/2206072150) and will be uploaded soon on [Effect YouTube Channel](https://www.youtube.com/@effect-ts), where you can already find the first episode:
<YouTube url="https://www.youtube.com/embed/i4lYoTV0q6U?si=IiWblmlPZDMYcC3O" />

+ [Ethan Niser](https://x.com/ethanniser), Effect educator and instructor at the Effect Days workshop in Vienna, published a new video about what Structured Concurrency is and how it can be leveraged trough Effect.
<YouTube url="https://www.youtube.com/embed/ibxUIL_-LlA?si=u_GeUFW0NXoBKQYe" />

## Closing notes

That's all for this week. Thank you for being a vital part of our community. Your feedback is highly valued as we fine-tune this format. Feel free to share your thoughts, and we'll do our best to tailor it to the needs of our community.

_Effect Community Team_
