content/blog/0043-this-week-in-effect-2024-08-09.mdx, before:

---
title: This Week in Effect - 2024-08-09
excerpt:  Effect 3.6 and Effect Playground releases.'Reimagining Contentlayer' ep. 3 by Maxwell Brown and Tim Smart. 'Effect Cluster' ep.1 by Michael Arnaldi, Maxwell Brown and Mattia Manzati. 
date: 2024-08-09
authors:
  - name: Davide Scognamiglio
    description: Project Manager
    avatar: https://pbs.twimg.com/profile_images/1329959878476111875/evHG8VX6_400x400.jpg
    twitter: https://twitter.com/DadeSkoTV
  - name: Mirela Prifti
    description: Community Manager
    avatar: https://pbs.twimg.com/profile_images/1728403785024770048/frKphayT_400x400.jpg
    twitter: https://twitter.com/mirepri4
  - name: Michael Arnaldi
    description: Chief Executive Officer
    avatar: https://pbs.twimg.com/profile_images/1232338149340319751/Ln9nNWyk_400x400.jpg
    twitter: https://twitter.com/MichaelArnaldi
relatedPosts:
  - this-week-in-effect-2024-08-02
---

Hi Effecters! 

Welcome back to This Week In Effect (**TWIE**) – a weekly update to keep you in the loop with all the latest developments in the Effect community and ecosystem.

Effect is a powerful TypeScript library that helps developers create complex, synchronous, and asynchronous programs. One of the key features that sets Effect apart is how it leverages structured concurrency to provide features such as async cancellation and safe resource management, making it easier to build robust, scalable, and efficient programs.

Get started with Effect with our quick-start guide and documentation below:

- [Effect quick-start guide](/docs/quickstart)
- [Effect docs](/docs/introduction)

Recent major updates:

- Effect is API stable with the [Effect 3.0 release](https://effect.website/blog/effect-3.0).
- [Effect 3.6](https://effect.website/blog/effect-3.6) has been released.
- Our [community on Discord](https://discord.gg/effect-ts) reached 3350+ members!
- All talks from Effect Days 2024 are available on the [Effect YouTube channel](https://www.youtube.com/@effect-ts).


## Technology

+ For those who may have missed last week announcement, we introduced the [Effect Playground](https://effect.website/play), an interactive coding experience on Effect’s website for exploring API, with features like Monaco editor, file tree, terminal, and integration with Effect Developer Tools. Read the full [Effect Playground release post](https://effect.website/blog/playground-release) and happy coding!
<YouTube url="https://www.youtube.com/embed/zrMY9r9CRoc?si=UzeFoqTLv0Bx4441" />

Here are all the technical changes that occurred last week.

### Effect Core
+ [Fix Effect.repeat with times option returning wrong value](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3405) (Bug Fix)
+ [Add propagateInterruption option to Fiber 'Handle,Set,Map'](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3407) (Feature, next-minor)

### Effect Experimental
+ [Remove TimeToLive trait in favour of timeToLive options](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3417) (Enhancement)
+ [Properly interrupt DevTools client during finalization](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3420) (Bug Fix)

### Effect Platform
+ [Ensure failure in HttpMiddleware results in a response](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3408) (Bug Fix)
+ [Ensure broken HttpMiddleware that doesn't fail responds](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3414) (Bug Fix)
+ [Add 'Bun,Node'HttpServer.layerTest for testing http servers](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3409) (Feature)
+ [Fix for missing global undici dispatcher](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3428) (Bug Fix)

### Effect Cluster
+ [Update README.md](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3434) (Documentation Update)

### Effect SQL
+ [Update README.md](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3401) (Documentation Update)

### Effect Schema
+ [Representing Optional Fields with never Type](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3419) (Documentation Update)
+ [Fix return types for attachPropertySignature function](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3430) (Bug Fix)

### Effect Vitest
+ [Interrupt effect when test finishes](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3416) (Bug Fix)

### Effect RPC
+ [Ensure /rpc streams on bun aren't interrupted early](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3426) (Bug Fix)

### General Chores
+ [update version of node used by ci](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3402) (Optimization)


## Community highlights

In the last week, we welcomed +40 new Effecters to our [Discord community](https://discord.gg/effect-ts) - we're very excited to have you all on board! 

+ [Ethan Niser](https://x.com/ethanniser), Effect educator and workshop instructor at Effect Days 2024, recently started his own [blog](https://ethanniser.dev/) and, in his very first article, he shared a series of [Effect best practices](https://ethanniser.dev/blog/effect-best-practices/).
<Tweet id="1819537530393710839" />

+ [David Siegel](https://x.com/dvdsgl), CEO of [Glide](https://www.glideapps.com/), showed how an Effect service can be used for structured generation in LLMs completion. 
<Tweet id="1821000372317794653" />

+ [Wayne Maurer](https://x.com/waynemaurer), co-founder of [Lambda IT](https://x.com/Lambda_IT), answering to a [Matt Pocock](https://x.com/mattpocockuk)'s tweet, made a statement that we definitely resonate with:
<Tweet id="1819326023885877440" />

## Effect content update

+ The first design sync session of Effect Cluster with [Michael Arnaldi](https://x.com/MichaelArnaldi), [Maxwell Brown](https://x.com/imax153), and [Mattia Manzati](https://x.com/MattiaManzati) is available on the [Effect YouTube Channel](https://www.youtube.com/@effect-ts)
<YouTube url="https://www.youtube.com/embed/8AhJNkTpA1w?si=tHLRA59kNaMbQIhA" />


## Closing notes

That's all for this week. Thank you for being a vital part of our community. Your feedback is highly valued as we fine-tune this format. Feel free to share your thoughts, and we'll do our best to tailor it to the needs of our community.

_Effect Community Team_

Commit message:

added latest prs, added reimagining contentLayer video , added related post to twie_02_08_2024

content/blog/0043-this-week-in-effect-2024-08-09.mdx, after:

---
title: This Week in Effect - 2024-08-09
excerpt:  Technical Updates in Effect. 'Effect Best Practises' by Ethan Niser. 'Reimagining Contentlayer' ep.3 & 'Effect Cluster' ep.1 video releases.
date: 2024-08-09
authors:
  - name: Davide Scognamiglio
    description: Project Manager
    avatar: https://pbs.twimg.com/profile_images/1329959878476111875/evHG8VX6_400x400.jpg
    twitter: https://twitter.com/DadeSkoTV
  - name: Mirela Prifti
    description: Community Manager
    avatar: https://pbs.twimg.com/profile_images/1728403785024770048/frKphayT_400x400.jpg
    twitter: https://twitter.com/mirepri4
  - name: Michael Arnaldi
    description: Chief Executive Officer
    avatar: https://pbs.twimg.com/profile_images/1232338149340319751/Ln9nNWyk_400x400.jpg
    twitter: https://twitter.com/MichaelArnaldi
relatedPosts:
  - this-week-in-effect-2024-08-02
---

Hi Effecters! 

Welcome back to This Week In Effect (**TWIE**) – a weekly update to keep you in the loop with all the latest developments in the Effect community and ecosystem.

Effect is a powerful TypeScript library that helps developers create complex, synchronous, and asynchronous programs. One of the key features that sets Effect apart is how it leverages structured concurrency to provide features such as async cancellation and safe resource management, making it easier to build robust, scalable, and efficient programs.

Get started with Effect with our quick-start guide and documentation below:

- [Effect quick-start guide](/docs/quickstart)
- [Effect docs](/docs/introduction)

Recent major updates:

- Effect is API stable with the [Effect 3.0 release](https://effect.website/blog/effect-3.0).
- [Effect 3.6](https://effect.website/blog/effect-3.6) has been released.
- Our [community on Discord](https://discord.gg/effect-ts) reached 3360+ members!
- All talks from Effect Days 2024 are available on the [Effect YouTube channel](https://www.youtube.com/@effect-ts).


## Technology

+ For those who may have missed last week announcement, we introduced the [Effect Playground](https://effect.website/play), an interactive coding experience on Effect’s website for exploring API, with features like Monaco editor, file tree, terminal, and integration with Effect Developer Tools. Read the full [Effect Playground release post](https://effect.website/blog/playground-release) and happy coding!
<YouTube url="https://www.youtube.com/embed/zrMY9r9CRoc?si=UzeFoqTLv0Bx4441" />

Here are all the technical changes that occurred last week.

### Effect Core
+ [Fix Effect.repeat with times option returning wrong value](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3405) (Bug Fix)
+ [Add propagateInterruption option to Fiber 'Handle,Set,Map'](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3407) (Feature, next-minor)
+ [Ensure fiber is properly cleared in FiberHandle.unsafeSet](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3435) (Bug Fix)

### Effect Experimental
+ [Remove TimeToLive trait in favour of timeToLive options](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3417) (Enhancement)
+ [Properly interrupt DevTools client during finalization](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3420) (Bug Fix)

### Effect Platform
+ [Ensure failure in HttpMiddleware results in a response](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3408) (Bug Fix)
+ [Ensure broken HttpMiddleware that doesn't fail responds](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3414) (Bug Fix)
+ [Add 'Bun,Node'HttpServer.layerTest for testing http servers](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3409) (Feature)
+ [Fix for missing global undici dispatcher](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3428) (Bug Fix)
+ [Remove host from HttpServerRequest url's](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3436) (Bug Fix)
+ [Add Cookies.get/getValue apis](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3437) (Feature)

### Effect Cluster
+ [Update README.md](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3434) (Documentation Update)

### Effect SQL
+ [Update README.md](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3401) (Documentation Update)

### Effect Schema
+ [Representing Optional Fields with never Type](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3419) (Documentation Update)
+ [Fix return types for attachPropertySignature function](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3430) (Bug Fix)

### Effect Vitest
+ [Interrupt effect when test finishes](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3416) (Bug Fix)

### Effect RPC
+ [Ensure /rpc streams on bun aren't interrupted early](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3426) (Bug Fix)

### General Chores
+ [update version of node used by ci](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3402) (Optimization)


## Community highlights

In the last week, we welcomed +50 new Effecters to our [Discord community](https://discord.gg/effect-ts) - we're very excited to have you all on board! 

+ [Ethan Niser](https://x.com/ethanniser), Effect educator and workshop instructor at Effect Days 2024, recently started his own [blog](https://ethanniser.dev/) and, in his very first article, he shared a series of [Effect best practices](https://ethanniser.dev/blog/effect-best-practices/).
<Tweet id="1819537530393710839" />

+ [David Siegel](https://x.com/dvdsgl), CEO of [Glide](https://www.glideapps.com/), showed how an Effect service can be used for structured generation in LLMs completion. 
<Tweet id="1821000372317794653" />

+ [Wayne Maurer](https://x.com/waynemaurer), co-founder of [Lambda IT](https://x.com/Lambda_IT), answering to a [Matt Pocock](https://x.com/mattpocockuk)'s tweet, made a statement that we definitely resonate with:
<Tweet id="1819326023885877440" />

## Effect content update

+ The first design sync session of Effect Cluster with [Michael Arnaldi](https://x.com/MichaelArnaldi), [Maxwell Brown](https://x.com/imax153), and [Mattia Manzati](https://x.com/MattiaManzati), 
<YouTube url="https://www.youtube.com/embed/8AhJNkTpA1w?si=tHLRA59kNaMbQIhA" />

+ and the third episode of 'Reimagining ContentLayer With Effect', with Maxwell Brown and [Tim Smart](https://x.com/tim_smart) are available on the [Effect YouTube Channel](https://www.youtube.com/@effect-ts)

<YouTube url="https://www.youtube.com/embed/2b2LZjp8490?si=maZbeJFKWlRgLjy1" />


## Closing notes

That's all for this week. Thank you for being a vital part of our community. Your feedback is highly valued as we fine-tune this format. Feel free to share your thoughts, and we'll do our best to tailor it to the needs of our community.

_Effect Community Team_
