content/src/content/docs/blog/this-week-in-effect/2025/09/05.mdx, before:

---
pagefind: false
title: This Week in Effect - 2025-09-05
excerpt: The difficulty of complexity bu Ethan Niser. Demystifying Effect Scopes by Harry Solovay. Rebuilding ContentLayer, Effect API provider integration for Google & ChEffect development coding sessions. 
date: 2025-09-05
authors:
  - davide_scognamiglio
  - mirela_prifti
  - michael_arnaldi
tags:
  - This Week In Effect
---

import { YouTube } from "@astro-community/astro-embed-youtube"
import Tweet from "astro-tweet"
import TwitchPlayerNonInteractive from "@/components/TwitchPlayerNonInteractive.astro"

Hi Effecters!

Welcome back to This Week In Effect (**TWIE**) - your weekly update of the latest developments in the Effect community and ecosystem.

Effect is a powerful TypeScript library that helps developers create complex, synchronous, and asynchronous programs. One key feature that sets Effect apart is how it leverages structured concurrency to provide features such as async cancellation and safe resource management, making it easier to build robust, scalable, and efficient programs.

To get started, below you’ll find links to our documentation as well as our guide for installing Effect. Enjoy!

- [Effect Documentation](/docs/getting-started/introduction/)
- [Installing Effect](/docs/getting-started/installation/)


**Recent major updates:**

- [Effect 3.17](https://effect.website/blog/releases/effect/317) Release.
- Durable workflows in TypeScript with [`@effect/workflow`](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/blob/main/packages/workflow/README.md) - currently in alpha.
- Effect AI integration packages, [`@effect/ai`](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/tree/main/packages/ai) - currently in alpha.
- The [Effect community](https://discord.gg/effect-ts) on Discord reached 5230+ members!
- Effect crossed [11K Stars on GitHub](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect) 🌟.

&nbsp;
## Technology

Here are all the technical changes from the past week.

### Effect Core
- [Align Either type parameter naming with Effect](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/5445) (Refactor)
- [Fix Predicate.isIterable to allow strings](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/5451) (Bug Fix)
- [Simplify Effect.raceAll implementation, ensure children fibers are awaited](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/5449) (Bug Fix)
- [Add preload options to LayerMap](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/5456) (Feature)
- [Ensure tracerLogger does not drop message items](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/5462) (Bug Fix)
- [Automatically set otel parent when present as external span](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/5433) (Feature, next-minor)

### Effect AI
- [Fix InferenceConfiguration schema in the Amazon Bedrock AI provider package](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/5438) (Bug Fix)
- [Ensure verbose transcription schema is tried before standard transcription schema](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/5450) (Bug Fix)
- [Wait for client to initialize before sending notifications](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/5453) (Bug Fix)

### Effect Opentelemetry
- [Propagate spanId and traceId to otel logs](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/5444) (Feature)
- [Automatically set otel parent when present as external span](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/5433) (Feature, next-minor)

### Effect RPC
- [Wait for client to initialize before sending notifications](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/5453) (Bug Fix)

### Effect SQL
- [Invalidate prepared-statement cache after loadExtension (Node)](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/5459) (Bug Fix)

&nbsp;

## Community Highlights

&nbsp;

- **Demystifying Effect Scopes** by Harry Solovay.
  <Tweet id="1962882545311187165" />

&nbsp;

- In his latest article, [*The Difficulty of Complexity*](https://ethanniser.dev/blog/the-difficulty-of-complexity), Ethan Niser compares the first impression of Effect to the early days of **React**. Effect’s code may look unusual at first, but that strangeness is only temporary. The more you use it, the faster it starts to feel natural — proof that Effect isn’t complex by nature, just new.
  <Tweet id="1961660251436192183" />

&nbsp;
## Effect Content Update

**Rebuilding Contentlayer w/ Effect (Part 18)**, **Building an Effect API Provider Integration for Google (PART 4)** & **ChEffect | A Local-First App built with Effect & LiveStore (PART 3)** are now on our YouTube Channel.

<YouTube
  id="https://www.youtube.com/embed/JHJsWEg_16U?si=iVdzlnM5V1f7F_k0"
  title="Rebuilding Contentlayer w/ Effect (Part 18)"
/>

&nbsp;

<YouTube
  id="https://www.youtube.com/embed/borgHsyb1PI?si=ZvyWv0CbSqMYI2qp"
  title="Building an Effect API Provider Integration for Google (PART 4)"
/>

&nbsp;

<YouTube
  id="https://www.youtube.com/embed/J13YDYguMPA?si=rO8BNqKXfwwxQ9EL"
  title="ChEffect | A Local-First App built with Effect & LiveStore (PART 3)"
/>

&nbsp;
## Cause & Effect Podcast

Don't forget to listen to our **Cause & Effect** podcast hosted by Johannes Schickling and available on [Youtube](https://www.youtube.com/@effect-ts), [X(Twitter)](https://x.com/EffectTS_/status/1952323630945477085), and audio platforms like [Spotify](https://open.spotify.com/episode/55UP4hMa20s7taw16kABEU) and [Apple Podcast](https://podcasts.apple.com/us/podcast/from-skeptic-to-advocate-scaling-effect-at-vercel-4/id1781879869?i=1000720579998). 

This podcast highlights stories from software engineers and companies using Effect in production. Each episode explores their journey of adopting Effect, including the learning process, challenges faced, and benefits of integrating Effect into their tech stack.

We've published our fourth episode with Dillon Mulroy, Domains Lead at [Vercel](https://vercel.com), who shares his own journey with Effect and how Vercel gradually adopted it across their Domains platform. Dillon explains why Effect feels like having superpowers for error handling, observability, testing, and more!

<YouTube
  id="https://www.youtube.com/embed/rPKohHGPqCY?si=wLEZ5iEtn7aG0NeM"
  title="From Skeptic to Advocate: Scaling Effect at Vercel | Dillon Mulroy | Cause & Effect #4"
/>

&nbsp;
## Effect Job Opportunities

More and more companies are adopting Effect in their projects. Here’s a list of companies looking for software engineers with Effect experience:

- **Expand.ai**: [Founding Engineer](https://www.expand.ai/careers/founding-engineer)

- **Platonic Systems**: [Remote Effect Engineers](https://twitter.com/platonicsystems/status/1861470819861311945)

- **Inato**: [Product Engineers / Fullstack Engineers](https://jobs.lever.co/inato/6df2d1e3-ce0a-487b-a930-840759803d44)

- **Medbill.ai**: [Founding Software Engineers (full-stack and backend)](https://www.linkedin.com/posts/codingtom_medbill-ai-activity-7260092522708762624-N7TH)

- **Oneiro Solutions**: Software Engineer - Core Team. [Join Effect Discord](https://discord.com/channels/795981131316985866/796153351372275743) and DM *leighman* for further info.

- **Microsub**: [TS Developer](https://x.com/0xdownshift/status/1880013835878154510)

- **Samsung Food**: [Full Stack Developer](https://whisk.bamboohr.com/careers/110)

- **Margins**: [Product Engineer](https://margins.app/jobs/product-engineer)

- **[Precurion](https://precurion.com/)** looking for a remote‑first Founding Engineer with Effect experience – See the job posting in the `#job-board` channel on [our Discord](https://discord.com/channels/795981131316985866/796153351372275743/1362610725931061258).

- **Vitalize Care** is hiring a full-stack engineer with Effect experience: [Full-Stack Engineer](https://jobs.ashbyhq.com/vitalize/d907ba5f-0f2f-4bb4-931a-1680d6daf81a)

- **Embedded Insurance** is hiring for a [Senior Software Engineering](https://embeddedinsurance.bamboohr.com/careers/23) position.

- **Betalyra**, an AI consulting company from Portugal, is looking for a part-time freelance software engineer (TypeScript/Effect) with AI experience – see the job posting in the `#job-board` channel on [our Discord](https://discord.com/channels/795981131316985866/796153351372275743/1362610725931061258).

- **Software Intelligence Works**: [Senior Full-Stack Engineer](https://remotive.com/remote-jobs/software-dev/senior-full-stack-engineer-2011648)

- **14.ai**: [Founding engineer](https://14.ai/careers)

- **Wander** is hiring [Software Developers](https://ship.wander.com) with experience in Effect.

- **Glide**: [Senior Frontend Product Engineer](https://www.glideapps.com/jobs/frontend-product-engineer)

- **Stealth team** looking for a software engineer with Effect experience – see the job posting in the `#job-board` channel on [our Discord](https://discord.com/channels/795981131316985866/796153351372275743/1362610725931061258).

- **A French-speaking** startup team led by Stephan Le Dorze is looking for a freelancer to join them - [see his LinkedIn post](https://www.linkedin.com/posts/stephaneledorze_mission-longue-avec-moi-entre-autre-activity-7310947252741570560-Bqsh/) for more details.

- **Freckle.io** is hiring [Platform Engineers](https://x.com/code_typist/status/1930326662677434561) with experience in Effect.

- **A stealth team** that has already scaled their product to 50K daily active users in the last year, is looking for [Effect Developers](https://x.com/wireless_dev/status/1930314012723687739). DM [wireless](https://x.com/wireless_dev) on X for more info.

- Job opening for [Japanese-speaking developers](https://note.com/luma/n/n679d4dcdb363)

- **VST**: [Senior Full Stack Software Engineer](https://www.linkedin.com/jobs/view/3854111540/)

- **Globe Commerce**: [Founding Product Engineer](https://www.linkedin.com/jobs/view/4264203054)

- **Introw**: [Staff Software Engineer](https://join.com/companies/introw/14395111-staff-software-engineer)

- **Gale**: [SWE Intern - Remote (CAN/US)](https://forms.galevisa.com/r/m6gr7e)

- **Heartbeat**: [Senior Software Engineer](https://jobs.heartbeat.chat/35182) 

- **spring.new**, Anthropic's flagship costumer, is hiring engineers experienced in Effect. See the job posting in the `#job-board` channel on [our Discord](https://discord.com/channels/795981131316985866/796153351372275743/1405134163287343196).

- **ManageSpace** is looking for a Senior Developer to mentor other developers and migrate to Effect – see the job posting in the `#job-board` channel on [our Discord](https://discord.com/channels/795981131316985866/796153351372275743/1389557459949060098).

- **coteach.ai** is looking for a Software Engineer – see the job posting in the `#job-board` channel on [our Discord](https://discord.com/channels/795981131316985866/796153351372275743/1394724166309253290) and DM *Peter Edmonds* for further info.

- **Small SaaS team** is looking for a part-time Effect Developer to implement Effect in their stack. The job posting is available in the `#job-board` channel on [our Discord](https://discord.com/channels/795981131316985866/796153351372275743/1397684638834491412), DM *jonpage* for further info.

_Disclaimer: Please note that these job postings are shared for informational purposes, and we encourage applicants to verify details directly with the hiring companies._


&nbsp;
## Effect Merch Store

The [Effect Merch Store](https://effect.website/merch) offers a selection of Effect-branded items designed for the community. All orders are processed and fully managed through [Printful](https://www.printful.com/).

<Tweet id="1868605126862385238" />


&nbsp;
## Closing Notes

That's all for this week. Thank you for being a vital part of our community. Your feedback is highly valued as we fine-tune this format. Feel free to share your thoughts, and we'll do our best to tailor it to the needs of our community.

_Effect Community Team_

Commit message:

Revise excerpt and article summary in 2025-09-05.md

content/src/content/docs/blog/this-week-in-effect/2025/09/05.mdx, after:

---
pagefind: false
title: This Week in Effect - 2025-09-05
excerpt: The difficulty of complexity by Ethan Niser. Demystifying Effect Scopes by Harry Solovay. Coding sessions: Rebuilding ContentLayer, Effect API provider integration for Google & ChEffect development. 
date: 2025-09-05
authors:
  - davide_scognamiglio
  - mirela_prifti
  - michael_arnaldi
tags:
  - This Week In Effect
---

import { YouTube } from "@astro-community/astro-embed-youtube"
import Tweet from "astro-tweet"
import TwitchPlayerNonInteractive from "@/components/TwitchPlayerNonInteractive.astro"

Hi Effecters!

Welcome back to This Week In Effect (**TWIE**) - your weekly update of the latest developments in the Effect community and ecosystem.

Effect is a powerful TypeScript library that helps developers create complex, synchronous, and asynchronous programs. One key feature that sets Effect apart is how it leverages structured concurrency to provide features such as async cancellation and safe resource management, making it easier to build robust, scalable, and efficient programs.

To get started, below you’ll find links to our documentation as well as our guide for installing Effect. Enjoy!

- [Effect Documentation](/docs/getting-started/introduction/)
- [Installing Effect](/docs/getting-started/installation/)


**Recent major updates:**

- [Effect 3.17](https://effect.website/blog/releases/effect/317) Release.
- Durable workflows in TypeScript with [`@effect/workflow`](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/blob/main/packages/workflow/README.md) - currently in alpha.
- Effect AI integration packages, [`@effect/ai`](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/tree/main/packages/ai) - currently in alpha.
- The [Effect community](https://discord.gg/effect-ts) on Discord reached 5230+ members!
- Effect crossed [11K Stars on GitHub](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect) 🌟.

&nbsp;
## Technology

Here are all the technical changes from the past week.

### Effect Core
- [Align Either type parameter naming with Effect](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/5445) (Refactor)
- [Fix Predicate.isIterable to allow strings](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/5451) (Bug Fix)
- [Simplify Effect.raceAll implementation, ensure children fibers are awaited](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/5449) (Bug Fix)
- [Add preload options to LayerMap](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/5456) (Feature)
- [Ensure tracerLogger does not drop message items](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/5462) (Bug Fix)
- [Automatically set otel parent when present as external span](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/5433) (Feature, next-minor)

### Effect AI
- [Fix InferenceConfiguration schema in the Amazon Bedrock AI provider package](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/5438) (Bug Fix)
- [Ensure verbose transcription schema is tried before standard transcription schema](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/5450) (Bug Fix)
- [Wait for client to initialize before sending notifications](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/5453) (Bug Fix)

### Effect Opentelemetry
- [Propagate spanId and traceId to otel logs](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/5444) (Feature)
- [Automatically set otel parent when present as external span](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/5433) (Feature, next-minor)

### Effect RPC
- [Wait for client to initialize before sending notifications](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/5453) (Bug Fix)

### Effect SQL
- [Invalidate prepared-statement cache after loadExtension (Node)](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/5459) (Bug Fix)

&nbsp;

## Community Highlights

&nbsp;

- **Demystifying Effect Scopes** by Harry Solovay.
  <Tweet id="1962882545311187165" />

&nbsp;

- In [*The Difficulty of Complexity*](https://ethanniser.dev/blog/the-difficulty-of-complexity), Ethan Niser compares Effect to the early days of React. Much like React did, Effect introduces a paradigm shift, initially unfamiliar, but quickly gaining adoption as teams realize how much it simplifies error handling, concurrency, and observability at scale.
  <Tweet id="1961660251436192183" />

&nbsp;
## Effect Content Update

**Rebuilding Contentlayer w/ Effect (Part 18)**, **Building an Effect API Provider Integration for Google (PART 4)** & **ChEffect | A Local-First App built with Effect & LiveStore (PART 3)** are now on our YouTube Channel.

<YouTube
  id="https://www.youtube.com/embed/JHJsWEg_16U?si=iVdzlnM5V1f7F_k0"
  title="Rebuilding Contentlayer w/ Effect (Part 18)"
/>

&nbsp;

<YouTube
  id="https://www.youtube.com/embed/borgHsyb1PI?si=ZvyWv0CbSqMYI2qp"
  title="Building an Effect API Provider Integration for Google (PART 4)"
/>

&nbsp;

<YouTube
  id="https://www.youtube.com/embed/J13YDYguMPA?si=rO8BNqKXfwwxQ9EL"
  title="ChEffect | A Local-First App built with Effect & LiveStore (PART 3)"
/>

&nbsp;
## Cause & Effect Podcast

Don't forget to listen to our **Cause & Effect** podcast hosted by Johannes Schickling and available on [Youtube](https://www.youtube.com/@effect-ts), [X(Twitter)](https://x.com/EffectTS_/status/1952323630945477085), and audio platforms like [Spotify](https://open.spotify.com/episode/55UP4hMa20s7taw16kABEU) and [Apple Podcast](https://podcasts.apple.com/us/podcast/from-skeptic-to-advocate-scaling-effect-at-vercel-4/id1781879869?i=1000720579998). 

This podcast highlights stories from software engineers and companies using Effect in production. Each episode explores their journey of adopting Effect, including the learning process, challenges faced, and benefits of integrating Effect into their tech stack.

We've published our fourth episode with Dillon Mulroy, Domains Lead at [Vercel](https://vercel.com), who shares his own journey with Effect and how Vercel gradually adopted it across their Domains platform. Dillon explains why Effect feels like having superpowers for error handling, observability, testing, and more!

<YouTube
  id="https://www.youtube.com/embed/rPKohHGPqCY?si=wLEZ5iEtn7aG0NeM"
  title="From Skeptic to Advocate: Scaling Effect at Vercel | Dillon Mulroy | Cause & Effect #4"
/>

&nbsp;
## Effect Job Opportunities

More and more companies are adopting Effect in their projects. Here’s a list of companies looking for software engineers with Effect experience:

- **Expand.ai**: [Founding Engineer](https://www.expand.ai/careers/founding-engineer)

- **Platonic Systems**: [Remote Effect Engineers](https://twitter.com/platonicsystems/status/1861470819861311945)

- **Inato**: [Product Engineers / Fullstack Engineers](https://jobs.lever.co/inato/6df2d1e3-ce0a-487b-a930-840759803d44)

- **Medbill.ai**: [Founding Software Engineers (full-stack and backend)](https://www.linkedin.com/posts/codingtom_medbill-ai-activity-7260092522708762624-N7TH)

- **Oneiro Solutions**: Software Engineer - Core Team. [Join Effect Discord](https://discord.com/channels/795981131316985866/796153351372275743) and DM *leighman* for further info.

- **Microsub**: [TS Developer](https://x.com/0xdownshift/status/1880013835878154510)

- **Samsung Food**: [Full Stack Developer](https://whisk.bamboohr.com/careers/110)

- **Margins**: [Product Engineer](https://margins.app/jobs/product-engineer)

- **[Precurion](https://precurion.com/)** looking for a remote‑first Founding Engineer with Effect experience – See the job posting in the `#job-board` channel on [our Discord](https://discord.com/channels/795981131316985866/796153351372275743/1362610725931061258).

- **Vitalize Care** is hiring a full-stack engineer with Effect experience: [Full-Stack Engineer](https://jobs.ashbyhq.com/vitalize/d907ba5f-0f2f-4bb4-931a-1680d6daf81a)

- **Embedded Insurance** is hiring for a [Senior Software Engineering](https://embeddedinsurance.bamboohr.com/careers/23) position.

- **Betalyra**, an AI consulting company from Portugal, is looking for a part-time freelance software engineer (TypeScript/Effect) with AI experience – see the job posting in the `#job-board` channel on [our Discord](https://discord.com/channels/795981131316985866/796153351372275743/1362610725931061258).

- **Software Intelligence Works**: [Senior Full-Stack Engineer](https://remotive.com/remote-jobs/software-dev/senior-full-stack-engineer-2011648)

- **14.ai**: [Founding engineer](https://14.ai/careers)

- **Wander** is hiring [Software Developers](https://ship.wander.com) with experience in Effect.

- **Glide**: [Senior Frontend Product Engineer](https://www.glideapps.com/jobs/frontend-product-engineer)

- **Stealth team** looking for a software engineer with Effect experience – see the job posting in the `#job-board` channel on [our Discord](https://discord.com/channels/795981131316985866/796153351372275743/1362610725931061258).

- **A French-speaking** startup team led by Stephan Le Dorze is looking for a freelancer to join them - [see his LinkedIn post](https://www.linkedin.com/posts/stephaneledorze_mission-longue-avec-moi-entre-autre-activity-7310947252741570560-Bqsh/) for more details.

- **Freckle.io** is hiring [Platform Engineers](https://x.com/code_typist/status/1930326662677434561) with experience in Effect.

- **A stealth team** that has already scaled their product to 50K daily active users in the last year, is looking for [Effect Developers](https://x.com/wireless_dev/status/1930314012723687739). DM [wireless](https://x.com/wireless_dev) on X for more info.

- Job opening for [Japanese-speaking developers](https://note.com/luma/n/n679d4dcdb363)

- **VST**: [Senior Full Stack Software Engineer](https://www.linkedin.com/jobs/view/3854111540/)

- **Globe Commerce**: [Founding Product Engineer](https://www.linkedin.com/jobs/view/4264203054)

- **Introw**: [Staff Software Engineer](https://join.com/companies/introw/14395111-staff-software-engineer)

- **Gale**: [SWE Intern - Remote (CAN/US)](https://forms.galevisa.com/r/m6gr7e)

- **Heartbeat**: [Senior Software Engineer](https://jobs.heartbeat.chat/35182) 

- **spring.new**, Anthropic's flagship costumer, is hiring engineers experienced in Effect. See the job posting in the `#job-board` channel on [our Discord](https://discord.com/channels/795981131316985866/796153351372275743/1405134163287343196).

- **ManageSpace** is looking for a Senior Developer to mentor other developers and migrate to Effect – see the job posting in the `#job-board` channel on [our Discord](https://discord.com/channels/795981131316985866/796153351372275743/1389557459949060098).

- **coteach.ai** is looking for a Software Engineer – see the job posting in the `#job-board` channel on [our Discord](https://discord.com/channels/795981131316985866/796153351372275743/1394724166309253290) and DM *Peter Edmonds* for further info.

- **Small SaaS team** is looking for a part-time Effect Developer to implement Effect in their stack. The job posting is available in the `#job-board` channel on [our Discord](https://discord.com/channels/795981131316985866/796153351372275743/1397684638834491412), DM *jonpage* for further info.

_Disclaimer: Please note that these job postings are shared for informational purposes, and we encourage applicants to verify details directly with the hiring companies._


&nbsp;
## Effect Merch Store

The [Effect Merch Store](https://effect.website/merch) offers a selection of Effect-branded items designed for the community. All orders are processed and fully managed through [Printful](https://www.printful.com/).

<Tweet id="1868605126862385238" />


&nbsp;
## Closing Notes

That's all for this week. Thank you for being a vital part of our community. Your feedback is highly valued as we fine-tune this format. Feel free to share your thoughts, and we'll do our best to tailor it to the needs of our community.

_Effect Community Team_
