content/src/content/docs/blog/this-week-in-effect/2025/09/12.mdx, before:

---
pagefind: false
title: This Week in Effect - 2025-09-12
excerpt: Build Production-Ready AI Agents with TypeScript Effect & Amazon Bedrock by AWS Developers. Show Layer Graph for the Effect LSP plugin and Rewriting Effect's CLI code session.
date: 2025-09-12
authors:
  - davide_scognamiglio
  - mirela_prifti
  - michael_arnaldi
tags:
  - This Week In Effect
---

import { YouTube } from "@astro-community/astro-embed-youtube"
import Tweet from "astro-tweet"
import TwitchPlayerNonInteractive from "@/components/TwitchPlayerNonInteractive.astro"

Hi Effecters!

Welcome back to This Week In Effect (**TWIE**) - your weekly update of the latest developments in the Effect community and ecosystem.

Effect is a powerful TypeScript library that helps developers create complex, synchronous, and asynchronous programs. One key feature that sets Effect apart is how it leverages structured concurrency to provide features such as async cancellation and safe resource management, making it easier to build robust, scalable, and efficient programs.

To get started, below you’ll find links to our documentation as well as our guide for installing Effect. Enjoy!

- [Effect Documentation](/docs/getting-started/introduction/)
- [Installing Effect](/docs/getting-started/installation/)


**Recent major updates:**

- [Effect 3.17](https://effect.website/blog/releases/effect/317) Release.
- Durable workflows in TypeScript with [`@effect/workflow`](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/blob/main/packages/workflow/README.md) - currently in alpha.
- Effect AI integration packages, [`@effect/ai`](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/tree/main/packages/ai) - currently in alpha.
- The [Effect community](https://discord.gg/effect-ts) on Discord reached 5270+ members!
- Effect crossed [11K Stars on GitHub](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect) 🌟.

&nbsp;
## Technology

Here are all the technical changes from the past week.

### Effect Core
- [Docs: fix JSDoc content for Predicate.isNumber to match the implementation](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/5478) (Documentation Update)

### Effect AI
- [Ensure finish part is emitted by anthropic when streaming](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/5474) (Bug Fix)
- [Fix: Fixes the total token count](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/5476) (Bug Fix)
- [Feat: added allowed tools](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/5377) (Feature, next-minor)

### Effect Cluster
- [Ensure defects don't cause loops in ClusterCron](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/5472) (Bug Fix)
- [Fix multiple persisted requests subscribing to the same id](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/5484) (Bug Fix)
- [Add Workflow.poll api](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/5486) (Feature)

### Effect Opentelemetry
- [Fix traceFlags propagation when set to 0](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/5485) (Bug Fix)

### Effect Platform
- [Add suffix option to FileSystem.makeTempFile](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/5481) (Feature)
- [Provide http span to global middleware](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/5492) (Improvement)

### Effect Workflow
- [Suspend workflow execution to ensure defects don't escape](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/5470) (Bug Fix)
- [Add Workflow.poll api](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/5486) (Feature)
- [Return executionId from Workflow.execute + discard](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/5488) (Improvement)

&nbsp;

## Community Highlights

- Maxwell Brown, Effect core-contributor, has been featured in the latest [Amazon AWS Deelopers](https://www.youtube.com/@awsdevelopers) video tutorial: **Build Production-Ready AI Agents with TypeScript Effect & Amazon Bedrock**. 
In this video, together with James Ward, Maxwell shows how to create reliable AI agents using Effect and Amazon Bedrock, covering error handling, tool integration, schemas, and building production-grade AI applications.

<YouTube
  id="https://www.youtube.com/embed/iLa0d8WF-ng?si=G-GwGyHMm1l4lO3O"
  title="Build Production-Ready AI Agents with TypeScript Effect & Amazon Bedrock (Complete Tutorial)"
/>


&nbsp;

- [Devin Jameson](https://github.com/devinjameson) just released [Foldkit](https://github.com/devinjameson/foldkit), a **lightweight framework for building functional UIs** in TypeScript powered by Effect.

&nbsp;

- In a recent [tweet](https://x.com/afonsolfm/status/1966052381566881948), Alfonso Matos delved into the refactoring of the [Arvow](https://arvow.com/) SaaS using Effect, and how their team turned overwhelming complexity into a resilient and maintainable system, simplifying error handling, workflows, and stability where everything used to break.

&nbsp;

- A shoutout to [Marcelo Bairros](https://x.com/marcelohbairros) for presenting [Ledda.ai](https://www.ledda.ai) and never missing the chance to spread the Effect word!
  <Tweet id="1965767249547182379" />

&nbsp;

- [`@effect-native/crsql`](https://github.com/effect-native/effect-native/tree/effect-native/main/packages-native/crsql), an Effect Service with `@effect/sql` prepared statements for working with the cr-sqlite extension, was realeased this week by Tom Aylott.

&nbsp;
## Effect Content Update

Maxwell Brown and Tim Smart were live on X and Twitch as they continue their work on *ChEffect*.
  <Tweet id="1965892268105314773" />

In his latest tutorial, Mattia Manzati explores how the **Show Full Layer Graph** functionality in the **Effect LSP** plugin makes it easier for developers to inspect and organize complex dependency tree layers.
  <Tweet id="1964967238236246181" />

&nbsp;

**Rewriting Effect's CLI** is now on our YouTube Channel.

<YouTube
  id="https://www.youtube.com/embed/qQKi8bHaLto?si=TRI0eBGCcr1Q7qQd"
  title="Rewriting Effect's CLI"
/>

&nbsp;
## Cause & Effect Podcast

Don't forget to listen to our **Cause & Effect** podcast hosted by Johannes Schickling and available on [Youtube](https://www.youtube.com/@effect-ts), [X(Twitter)](https://x.com/EffectTS_/status/1952323630945477085), and audio platforms like [Spotify](https://open.spotify.com/episode/55UP4hMa20s7taw16kABEU) and [Apple Podcast](https://podcasts.apple.com/us/podcast/from-skeptic-to-advocate-scaling-effect-at-vercel-4/id1781879869?i=1000720579998). 

This podcast highlights stories from software engineers and companies using Effect in production. Each episode explores their journey of adopting Effect, including the learning process, challenges faced, and benefits of integrating Effect into their tech stack.

We've published our fourth episode with Dillon Mulroy, Domains Lead at [Vercel](https://vercel.com), who shares his own journey with Effect and how Vercel gradually adopted it across their Domains platform. Dillon explains why Effect feels like having superpowers for error handling, observability, testing, and more!

<YouTube
  id="https://www.youtube.com/embed/rPKohHGPqCY?si=wLEZ5iEtn7aG0NeM"
  title="From Skeptic to Advocate: Scaling Effect at Vercel | Dillon Mulroy | Cause & Effect #4"
/>

&nbsp;
## Effect Job Opportunities

More and more companies are adopting Effect in their projects. Here’s a list of companies looking for software engineers with Effect experience:

- **Expand.ai**: [Founding Engineer](https://www.expand.ai/careers/founding-engineer)

- **Platonic Systems**: [Remote Effect Engineers](https://twitter.com/platonicsystems/status/1861470819861311945)

- **Inato**: [Product Engineers / Fullstack Engineers](https://jobs.lever.co/inato/6df2d1e3-ce0a-487b-a930-840759803d44)

- **Medbill.ai**: [Founding Software Engineers (full-stack and backend)](https://www.linkedin.com/posts/codingtom_medbill-ai-activity-7260092522708762624-N7TH)

- **Oneiro Solutions**: Software Engineer - Core Team. [Join Effect Discord](https://discord.com/channels/795981131316985866/796153351372275743) and DM *leighman* for further info.

- **Microsub**: [TS Developer](https://x.com/0xdownshift/status/1880013835878154510)

- **Samsung Food**: [Full Stack Developer](https://whisk.bamboohr.com/careers/110)

- **Margins**: [Product Engineer](https://margins.app/jobs/product-engineer)

- **[Precurion](https://precurion.com/)** looking for a remote‑first Founding Engineer with Effect experience – See the job posting in the `#job-board` channel on [our Discord](https://discord.com/channels/795981131316985866/796153351372275743/1362610725931061258).

- **Vitalize Care** is hiring a full-stack engineer with Effect experience: [Full-Stack Engineer](https://jobs.ashbyhq.com/vitalize/d907ba5f-0f2f-4bb4-931a-1680d6daf81a)

- **Embedded Insurance** is hiring for a [Senior Software Engineering](https://embeddedinsurance.bamboohr.com/careers/23) position.

- **Betalyra**, an AI consulting company from Portugal, is looking for a part-time freelance software engineer (TypeScript/Effect) with AI experience – see the job posting in the `#job-board` channel on [our Discord](https://discord.com/channels/795981131316985866/796153351372275743/1362610725931061258).

- **Software Intelligence Works**: [Senior Full-Stack Engineer](https://remotive.com/remote-jobs/software-dev/senior-full-stack-engineer-2011648)

- **14.ai**: [Founding engineer](https://14.ai/careers)

- **Wander** is hiring [Software Developers](https://ship.wander.com) with experience in Effect.

- **Glide**: [Senior Frontend Product Engineer](https://www.glideapps.com/jobs/frontend-product-engineer)

- **Stealth team** looking for a software engineer with Effect experience – see the job posting in the `#job-board` channel on [our Discord](https://discord.com/channels/795981131316985866/796153351372275743/1362610725931061258).

- **A French-speaking** startup team led by Stephan Le Dorze is looking for a freelancer to join them - [see his LinkedIn post](https://www.linkedin.com/posts/stephaneledorze_mission-longue-avec-moi-entre-autre-activity-7310947252741570560-Bqsh/) for more details.

- **Freckle.io** is hiring [Platform Engineers](https://x.com/code_typist/status/1930326662677434561) with experience in Effect.

- **A stealth team** that has already scaled their product to 50K daily active users in the last year, is looking for [Effect Developers](https://x.com/wireless_dev/status/1930314012723687739). DM [wireless](https://x.com/wireless_dev) on X for more info.

- Job opening for [Japanese-speaking developers](https://note.com/luma/n/n679d4dcdb363)

- **VST**: [Senior Full Stack Software Engineer](https://www.linkedin.com/jobs/view/3854111540/)

- **Globe Commerce**: [Founding Product Engineer](https://www.linkedin.com/jobs/view/4264203054)

- **Introw**: [Staff Software Engineer](https://join.com/companies/introw/14395111-staff-software-engineer)

- **Gale**: [SWE Intern - Remote (CAN/US)](https://forms.galevisa.com/r/m6gr7e)

- **Heartbeat**: [Senior Software Engineer](https://jobs.heartbeat.chat/35182) 

- **spring.new**, Anthropic's flagship costumer, is hiring engineers experienced in Effect. See the job posting in the `#job-board` channel on [our Discord](https://discord.com/channels/795981131316985866/796153351372275743/1405134163287343196).

- **ManageSpace** is looking for a Senior Developer to mentor other developers and migrate to Effect – see the job posting in the `#job-board` channel on [our Discord](https://discord.com/channels/795981131316985866/796153351372275743/1389557459949060098).

- **coteach.ai** is looking for a Software Engineer – see the job posting in the `#job-board` channel on [our Discord](https://discord.com/channels/795981131316985866/796153351372275743/1394724166309253290) and DM *Peter Edmonds* for further info.

- **Small SaaS team** is looking for a part-time Effect Developer to implement Effect in their stack. The job posting is available in the `#job-board` channel on [our Discord](https://discord.com/channels/795981131316985866/796153351372275743/1397684638834491412), DM *jonpage* for further info.

_Disclaimer: Please note that these job postings are shared for informational purposes, and we encourage applicants to verify details directly with the hiring companies._


&nbsp;
## Effect Merch Store

The [Effect Merch Store](https://effect.website/merch) offers a selection of Effect-branded items designed for the community. All orders are processed and fully managed through [Printful](https://www.printful.com/).

<Tweet id="1868605126862385238" />


&nbsp;
## Closing Notes

That's all for this week. Thank you for being a vital part of our community. Your feedback is highly valued as we fine-tune this format. Feel free to share your thoughts, and we'll do our best to tailor it to the needs of our community.

_Effect Community Team_

Commit message:

Revise blog post for 2025-09-12 with new details

content/src/content/docs/blog/this-week-in-effect/2025/09/12.mdx, after:

---
pagefind: false
title: This Week in Effect - 2025-09-12
excerpt: Effect Effect at the official AWS Developers channel! Complex dependencies now more manageable with Effect Layers. Rewriting Effect's CLI code session.
date: 2025-09-12
authors:
  - davide_scognamiglio
  - mirela_prifti
  - michael_arnaldi
tags:
  - This Week In Effect
---

import { YouTube } from "@astro-community/astro-embed-youtube"
import Tweet from "astro-tweet"
import TwitchPlayerNonInteractive from "@/components/TwitchPlayerNonInteractive.astro"

Hi Effecters!

Welcome back to This Week In Effect (**TWIE**) - your weekly update of the latest developments in the Effect community and ecosystem.

Effect is a powerful TypeScript library that helps developers create complex, synchronous, and asynchronous programs. One key feature that sets Effect apart is how it leverages structured concurrency to provide features such as async cancellation and safe resource management, making it easier to build robust, scalable, and efficient programs.

To get started, below you’ll find links to our documentation as well as our guide for installing Effect. Enjoy!

- [Effect Documentation](/docs/getting-started/introduction/)
- [Installing Effect](/docs/getting-started/installation/)


**Recent major updates:**

- [Effect 3.17](https://effect.website/blog/releases/effect/317) Release.
- Durable workflows in TypeScript with [`@effect/workflow`](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/blob/main/packages/workflow/README.md) - currently in alpha.
- Effect AI integration packages, [`@effect/ai`](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/tree/main/packages/ai) - currently in alpha.
- The [Effect community](https://discord.gg/effect-ts) on Discord reached 5280+ members!
- Effect crossed [11K Stars on GitHub](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect) 🌟.

&nbsp;
## Technology

Here are all the technical changes from the past week.

### Effect Core
- [Docs: fix JSDoc content for Predicate.isNumber to match the implementation](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/5478) (Documentation Update)

### Effect AI
- [Ensure finish part is emitted by anthropic when streaming](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/5474) (Bug Fix)
- [Fix: Fixes the total token count](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/5476) (Bug Fix)
- [Feat: added allowed tools](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/5377) (Feature, next-minor)

### Effect Cluster
- [Ensure defects don't cause loops in ClusterCron](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/5472) (Bug Fix)
- [Fix multiple persisted requests subscribing to the same id](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/5484) (Bug Fix)
- [Add Workflow.poll api](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/5486) (Feature)

### Effect Opentelemetry
- [Fix traceFlags propagation when set to 0](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/5485) (Bug Fix)

### Effect Platform
- [Add suffix option to FileSystem.makeTempFile](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/5481) (Feature)
- [Provide http span to global middleware](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/5492) (Improvement)

### Effect Workflow
- [Suspend workflow execution to ensure defects don't escape](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/5470) (Bug Fix)
- [Add Workflow.poll api](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/5486) (Feature)
- [Return executionId from Workflow.execute + discard](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/5488) (Improvement)

&nbsp;

## Community Highlights

- Maxwell Brown, Effect Core Contributor, presented Effect on the official **AWS Developers** channel. Together with James Ward, Principal Developer Advocate at Amazon, Maxwell showed how to create reliable AI agents using TypeScript, Effect, and Amazon Bedrock, covering error handling, tool integration, schemas, MCP server implementation, and more.

<YouTube
  id="https://www.youtube.com/embed/iLa0d8WF-ng?si=G-GwGyHMm1l4lO3O"
  title="Build Production-Ready AI Agents with TypeScript Effect & Amazon Bedrock (Complete Tutorial)"
/>


&nbsp;

- [Foldkit](https://github.com/devinjameson/foldkit), a **lightweight framework for building functional UIs** in TypeScript built with Effect by Devin Jameson.

&nbsp;

- In a recent [post on X](https://x.com/afonsolfm/status/1966052381566881948), Afonso Matos went through the challenges of building their SaaS, [Arvow](https://arvow.com/), and how Effect helped them build more resilient and maintainable software, simplifying error handling, workflows, and stability where everything used to break.

&nbsp;

- Congrats to Marcelo Bairros for presenting [Ledda.ai](https://www.ledda.ai) and never missing the chance to spread the word about Effect!
  <Tweet id="1965767249547182379" />

&nbsp;

- [`@effect-native/crsql`](https://github.com/effect-native/effect-native/tree/effect-native/main/packages-native/crsql), an Effect Service with `@effect/sql` prepared statements for working with the cr-sqlite extension, was released this week by Tom Aylott.

- [`@parischap/conversions`](https://www.npmjs.com/package/@parischap/conversions), [`@parischap/pretty-print`](https://www.npmjs.com/package/@parischap/pretty-print), [`@parischap/ansi-styles`](https://www.npmjs.com/package/@parischap/ansi-styles) by Jérôme Martin.

&nbsp;
## Effect Content Update

Maxwell Brown and Tim Smart were live on X and Twitch as they continue their work on *ChEffect*.
  <Tweet id="1965892268105314773" />

In his latest tutorial, Mattia Manzati shows how Effect Layers make complex dependencies more manageable!
  <Tweet id="1964967238236246181" />

&nbsp;

**Rewriting Effect's CLI** is now on our YouTube Channel.

<YouTube
  id="https://www.youtube.com/embed/qQKi8bHaLto?si=TRI0eBGCcr1Q7qQd"
  title="Rewriting Effect's CLI"
/>

&nbsp;
## Cause & Effect Podcast

Don't forget to listen to our **Cause & Effect** podcast hosted by Johannes Schickling and available on [Youtube](https://www.youtube.com/@effect-ts), [X(Twitter)](https://x.com/EffectTS_/status/1952323630945477085), and audio platforms like [Spotify](https://open.spotify.com/episode/55UP4hMa20s7taw16kABEU) and [Apple Podcast](https://podcasts.apple.com/us/podcast/from-skeptic-to-advocate-scaling-effect-at-vercel-4/id1781879869?i=1000720579998). 

This podcast highlights stories from software engineers and companies using Effect in production. Each episode explores their journey of adopting Effect, including the learning process, challenges faced, and benefits of integrating Effect into their tech stack.

We've published our fourth episode with Dillon Mulroy, Domains Lead at [Vercel](https://vercel.com), who shares his own journey with Effect and how Vercel gradually adopted it across their Domains platform. Dillon explains why Effect feels like having superpowers for error handling, observability, testing, and more!

<YouTube
  id="https://www.youtube.com/embed/rPKohHGPqCY?si=wLEZ5iEtn7aG0NeM"
  title="From Skeptic to Advocate: Scaling Effect at Vercel | Dillon Mulroy | Cause & Effect #4"
/>

&nbsp;
## Effect Job Opportunities

More and more companies are adopting Effect in their projects. Here’s a list of companies looking for software engineers with Effect experience:

- **Expand.ai**: [Founding Engineer](https://www.expand.ai/careers/founding-engineer)

- **Platonic Systems**: [Remote Effect Engineers](https://twitter.com/platonicsystems/status/1861470819861311945)

- **Inato**: [Product Engineers / Fullstack Engineers](https://jobs.lever.co/inato/6df2d1e3-ce0a-487b-a930-840759803d44)

- **Medbill.ai**: [Founding Software Engineers (full-stack and backend)](https://www.linkedin.com/posts/codingtom_medbill-ai-activity-7260092522708762624-N7TH)

- **Oneiro Solutions**: Software Engineer - Core Team. [Join Effect Discord](https://discord.com/channels/795981131316985866/796153351372275743) and DM *leighman* for further info.

- **Microsub**: [TS Developer](https://x.com/0xdownshift/status/1880013835878154510)

- **Samsung Food**: [Full Stack Developer](https://whisk.bamboohr.com/careers/110)

- **Margins**: [Product Engineer](https://margins.app/jobs/product-engineer)

- **[Precurion](https://precurion.com/)** looking for a remote‑first Founding Engineer with Effect experience – See the job posting in the `#job-board` channel on [our Discord](https://discord.com/channels/795981131316985866/796153351372275743/1362610725931061258).

- **Vitalize Care** is hiring a full-stack engineer with Effect experience: [Full-Stack Engineer](https://jobs.ashbyhq.com/vitalize/d907ba5f-0f2f-4bb4-931a-1680d6daf81a)

- **Embedded Insurance** is hiring for a [Senior Software Engineering](https://embeddedinsurance.bamboohr.com/careers/23) position.

- **Betalyra**, an AI consulting company from Portugal, is looking for a part-time freelance software engineer (TypeScript/Effect) with AI experience – see the job posting in the `#job-board` channel on [our Discord](https://discord.com/channels/795981131316985866/796153351372275743/1362610725931061258).

- **Software Intelligence Works**: [Senior Full-Stack Engineer](https://remotive.com/remote-jobs/software-dev/senior-full-stack-engineer-2011648)

- **14.ai**: [Founding engineer](https://14.ai/careers)

- **Wander** is hiring [Software Developers](https://ship.wander.com) with experience in Effect.

- **Glide**: [Senior Frontend Product Engineer](https://www.glideapps.com/jobs/frontend-product-engineer)

- **Stealth team** looking for a software engineer with Effect experience – see the job posting in the `#job-board` channel on [our Discord](https://discord.com/channels/795981131316985866/796153351372275743/1362610725931061258).

- **A French-speaking** startup team led by Stephan Le Dorze is looking for a freelancer to join them - [see his LinkedIn post](https://www.linkedin.com/posts/stephaneledorze_mission-longue-avec-moi-entre-autre-activity-7310947252741570560-Bqsh/) for more details.

- **Freckle.io** is hiring [Platform Engineers](https://x.com/code_typist/status/1930326662677434561) with experience in Effect.

- **A stealth team** that has already scaled their product to 50K daily active users in the last year, is looking for [Effect Developers](https://x.com/wireless_dev/status/1930314012723687739). DM [wireless](https://x.com/wireless_dev) on X for more info.

- Job opening for [Japanese-speaking developers](https://note.com/luma/n/n679d4dcdb363)

- **VST**: [Senior Full Stack Software Engineer](https://www.linkedin.com/jobs/view/3854111540/)

- **Globe Commerce**: [Founding Product Engineer](https://www.linkedin.com/jobs/view/4264203054)

- **Introw**: [Staff Software Engineer](https://join.com/companies/introw/14395111-staff-software-engineer)

- **Gale**: [SWE Intern - Remote (CAN/US)](https://forms.galevisa.com/r/m6gr7e)

- **Heartbeat**: [Senior Software Engineer](https://jobs.heartbeat.chat/35182) 

- **spring.new**, Anthropic's flagship costumer, is hiring engineers experienced in Effect. See the job posting in the `#job-board` channel on [our Discord](https://discord.com/channels/795981131316985866/796153351372275743/1405134163287343196).

- **ManageSpace** is looking for a Senior Developer to mentor other developers and migrate to Effect – see the job posting in the `#job-board` channel on [our Discord](https://discord.com/channels/795981131316985866/796153351372275743/1389557459949060098).

- **coteach.ai** is looking for a Software Engineer – see the job posting in the `#job-board` channel on [our Discord](https://discord.com/channels/795981131316985866/796153351372275743/1394724166309253290) and DM *Peter Edmonds* for further info.

- **Small SaaS team** is looking for a part-time Effect Developer to implement Effect in their stack. The job posting is available in the `#job-board` channel on [our Discord](https://discord.com/channels/795981131316985866/796153351372275743/1397684638834491412), DM *jonpage* for further info.

_Disclaimer: Please note that these job postings are shared for informational purposes, and we encourage applicants to verify details directly with the hiring companies._


&nbsp;
## Effect Merch Store

The [Effect Merch Store](https://effect.website/merch) offers a selection of Effect-branded items designed for the community. All orders are processed and fully managed through [Printful](https://www.printful.com/).

<Tweet id="1868605126862385238" />


&nbsp;
## Closing Notes

That's all for this week. Thank you for being a vital part of our community. Your feedback is highly valued as we fine-tune this format. Feel free to share your thoughts, and we'll do our best to tailor it to the needs of our community.

_Effect Community Team_
