content/docs/400-guides/660-streaming/300-subscriptionref.mdx, before:

---
title: SubscriptionRef
excerpt: Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet, consetetur sadipscing elitr, sed diam nonumy eirmod tempor invidunt ut labore.
---

A `SubscriptionRef<A>` is a specialized form of a [`SynchronizedRef`](../state-management/synchronizedref). It allows us to subscribe and receive updates on the current value and any changes made to that value.

```ts
export interface SubscriptionRef<A> extends Synchronized.SynchronizedRef<A> {
  /**
   * A stream containing the current value of the `Ref` as well as all changes
   * to that value.
   */
  readonly changes: Stream<never, never, A>
}
```

You can perform all the usual operations on a `SubscriptionRef`, such as `get`, `set`, or `modify` to work with the current value.

The `changes` stream is where the magic happens. It lets you observe the current value and all subsequent changes. Each time you run this stream, you'll get the current value as of that moment and any changes that occurred afterward.

To create a `SubscriptionRef`, you can use the `make` constructor, specifying the initial value:

```ts twoslash
import { SubscriptionRef } from "effect"

const ref = SubscriptionRef.make(0)
```

A `SubscriptionRef` can be invaluable when modeling shared state, especially when multiple observers need to react to every change in that shared state. For example, in a functional reactive programming context, the `SubscriptionRef` value might represent a part of the application state, and each observer could update various user interface elements based on changes to that state.

To see how this works, let's create a simple example where a "server" repeatedly updates a value observed by multiple "clients":

```ts twoslash
import { Ref, Effect } from "effect"

const server = (ref: Ref.Ref<number>) =>
  Ref.update(ref, (n) => n + 1).pipe(Effect.forever)
```

Note that the `server` function operates on a regular `Ref` and doesn't need to know about `SubscriptionRef`. It simply updates a value.

```ts twoslash
import { Ref, Effect, Stream, Random } from "effect"

const server = (ref: Ref.Ref<number>) =>
  Ref.update(ref, (n) => n + 1).pipe(Effect.forever)

const client = (changes: Stream.Stream<never, never, number>) =>
  Effect.gen(function* (_) {
    const n = yield* _(Random.nextIntBetween(1, 10))
    const chunk = yield* _(Stream.runCollect(Stream.take(changes, n)))
    return chunk
  })
```

Similarly, the `client` function only works with a `Stream` of values and doesn't concern itself with the source of these values.

To tie everything together, we start the server, launch multiple client instances in parallel, and then shut down the server when we're finished. We also create the `SubscriptionRef` in this process.

```ts twoslash
import { Ref, Effect, Stream, Random, SubscriptionRef, Fiber } from "effect"

const server = (ref: Ref.Ref<number>) =>
  Ref.update(ref, (n) => n + 1).pipe(Effect.forever)

const client = (changes: Stream.Stream<never, never, number>) =>
  Effect.gen(function* (_) {
    const n = yield* _(Random.nextIntBetween(1, 10))
    const chunk = yield* _(Stream.runCollect(Stream.take(changes, n)))
    return chunk
  })

const program = Effect.gen(function* (_) {
  const ref = yield* _(SubscriptionRef.make(0))
  const serverFiber = yield* _(Effect.fork(server(ref)))
  const clients = new Array(5).fill(null).map(() => client(ref.changes))
  const chunks = yield* _(Effect.all(clients, { concurrency: "unbounded" }))
  yield* _(Fiber.interrupt(serverFiber))
  for (const chunk of chunks) {
    console.log(chunk)
  }
})

Effect.runPromise(program)
/*
Output:
{
  _id: "Chunk",
  values: [ 2, 3, 4 ]
}
{
  _id: "Chunk",
  values: [ 2 ]
}
{
  _id: "Chunk",
  values: [ 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7 ]
}
{
  _id: "Chunk",
  values: [ 2, 3, 4 ]
}
{
  _id: "Chunk",
  values: [ 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9 ]
}
*/
```

This setup ensures that each client observes the current value when it starts and receives all subsequent changes to the value.

Since the changes are represented as streams, you can easily build more complex programs using familiar stream operators. You can transform, filter, or merge these streams with other streams to achieve more sophisticated behavior.

Commit message:

replace excerpt placeholders with actual content (index pages excluded) (#424)

content/docs/400-guides/660-streaming/300-subscriptionref.mdx, after:

---
title: SubscriptionRef
excerpt: Explore the capabilities of `SubscriptionRef` in Effect, a specialized form of `SynchronizedRef`. Learn how it allows you to subscribe and receive updates on the current value and any changes made to that value. Understand the power of the `changes` stream, which facilitates observing the value and subsequent changes. Dive into practical examples demonstrating the use of `SubscriptionRef` in modeling shared state, especially in scenarios where multiple observers need to react to every change. Witness the seamless integration of `SubscriptionRef` with asynchronous tasks and discover how it enhances efficient state management in your programs.
bottomNavigation: pagination
---

A `SubscriptionRef<A>` is a specialized form of a [`SynchronizedRef`](../state-management/synchronizedref). It allows us to subscribe and receive updates on the current value and any changes made to that value.

```ts
export interface SubscriptionRef<A> extends Synchronized.SynchronizedRef<A> {
  /**
   * A stream containing the current value of the `Ref` as well as all changes
   * to that value.
   */
  readonly changes: Stream<never, never, A>
}
```

You can perform all the usual operations on a `SubscriptionRef`, such as `get`, `set`, or `modify` to work with the current value.

The `changes` stream is where the magic happens. It lets you observe the current value and all subsequent changes. Each time you run this stream, you'll get the current value as of that moment and any changes that occurred afterward.

To create a `SubscriptionRef`, you can use the `make` constructor, specifying the initial value:

```ts twoslash
import { SubscriptionRef } from "effect"

const ref = SubscriptionRef.make(0)
```

A `SubscriptionRef` can be invaluable when modeling shared state, especially when multiple observers need to react to every change in that shared state. For example, in a functional reactive programming context, the `SubscriptionRef` value might represent a part of the application state, and each observer could update various user interface elements based on changes to that state.

To see how this works, let's create a simple example where a "server" repeatedly updates a value observed by multiple "clients":

```ts twoslash
import { Ref, Effect } from "effect"

const server = (ref: Ref.Ref<number>) =>
  Ref.update(ref, (n) => n + 1).pipe(Effect.forever)
```

Note that the `server` function operates on a regular `Ref` and doesn't need to know about `SubscriptionRef`. It simply updates a value.

```ts twoslash
import { Ref, Effect, Stream, Random } from "effect"

const server = (ref: Ref.Ref<number>) =>
  Ref.update(ref, (n) => n + 1).pipe(Effect.forever)

const client = (changes: Stream.Stream<never, never, number>) =>
  Effect.gen(function* (_) {
    const n = yield* _(Random.nextIntBetween(1, 10))
    const chunk = yield* _(Stream.runCollect(Stream.take(changes, n)))
    return chunk
  })
```

Similarly, the `client` function only works with a `Stream` of values and doesn't concern itself with the source of these values.

To tie everything together, we start the server, launch multiple client instances in parallel, and then shut down the server when we're finished. We also create the `SubscriptionRef` in this process.

```ts twoslash
import { Ref, Effect, Stream, Random, SubscriptionRef, Fiber } from "effect"

const server = (ref: Ref.Ref<number>) =>
  Ref.update(ref, (n) => n + 1).pipe(Effect.forever)

const client = (changes: Stream.Stream<never, never, number>) =>
  Effect.gen(function* (_) {
    const n = yield* _(Random.nextIntBetween(1, 10))
    const chunk = yield* _(Stream.runCollect(Stream.take(changes, n)))
    return chunk
  })

const program = Effect.gen(function* (_) {
  const ref = yield* _(SubscriptionRef.make(0))
  const serverFiber = yield* _(Effect.fork(server(ref)))
  const clients = new Array(5).fill(null).map(() => client(ref.changes))
  const chunks = yield* _(Effect.all(clients, { concurrency: "unbounded" }))
  yield* _(Fiber.interrupt(serverFiber))
  for (const chunk of chunks) {
    console.log(chunk)
  }
})

Effect.runPromise(program)
/*
Output:
{
  _id: "Chunk",
  values: [ 2, 3, 4 ]
}
{
  _id: "Chunk",
  values: [ 2 ]
}
{
  _id: "Chunk",
  values: [ 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7 ]
}
{
  _id: "Chunk",
  values: [ 2, 3, 4 ]
}
{
  _id: "Chunk",
  values: [ 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9 ]
}
*/
```

This setup ensures that each client observes the current value when it starts and receives all subsequent changes to the value.

Since the changes are represented as streams, you can easily build more complex programs using familiar stream operators. You can transform, filter, or merge these streams with other streams to achieve more sophisticated behavior.
