content/src/content/docs/docs/troubleshooting/v3.mdx, before:

---
title: Effect (v3)
description: Troubleshooting guide for Effect errors (v3).
sidebar:
  order: 1
---

If you get stuck, please try discussing the issue on the Effect [Discord](https://discord.gg/effect-ts) or posting a question to [Stackoverflow](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/tagged/effect-ts).
If you've found a bug, or Effect can't meet your needs, please try [raising an issue](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/issues).

## JSONSchema

### JSONSchema: Missing jsonSchema annotation

This error occurs when attempting to generate a JSON Schema for a type that has no direct representation in JSON Schema, such as `bigint`.

To resolve this, add a `jsonSchema` annotation to specify how the type should be represented.

For refined schemas, ensure that each refinement includes a `jsonSchema` annotation that describes its constraints.

For more details, see [Customizing JSON Schema Generation](/docs/schema/json-schema/#customizing-json-schema-generation).

### JSONSchema: Missing identifier annotation for recursive schemas

This error occurs when generating a JSON Schema for a recursive or mutually recursive schema that lacks an `identifier` annotation.

Recursive schemas need a unique `identifier` annotation to ensure correct references in the generated JSON Schema. Without it, the schema generator cannot resolve the self-referencing structure.

To resolve this, ensure that recursive schemas include an `identifier` annotation.

For more details, see [Recursive and Mutually Recursive Schemas](/docs/schema/json-schema/#recursive-and-mutually-recursive-schemas).

### JSONSchema: Unsupported Post Rest Elements

This error occurs when generating a JSON Schema for a tuple that includes **post-rest elements**, elements appearing after a rest parameter.
JSON Schema does not support this structure.

**Example**

```ts twoslash
import { Schema } from "effect"

//             Element after a rest parameter ───┐
// Rest Parameter ────────────────┐              |
//                                ▼              ▼
const schema = Schema.Tuple([], Schema.Number, Schema.String)
```

### JSONSchema: Unsupported Key

This error occurs when attempting to generate a JSON Schema for a structure that includes unsupported key types, such as `symbol`.
JSON Schema only supports string-based keys.

**Example**

```ts twoslash
import { Schema } from "effect"

// Schema with a symbol key (not allowed in JSON Schema)
const schema = Schema.Struct({
  [Symbol.for("my-symbol")]: Schema.String
})
```

as there is no way to represent this in JSON Schema.

Commit message:

Add troubleshooting guidance for missing arbitrary annotation in schemas

content/src/content/docs/docs/troubleshooting/v3.mdx, after:

---
title: Effect (v3)
description: Troubleshooting guide for Effect errors (v3).
sidebar:
  order: 1
---

If you get stuck, please try discussing the issue on the Effect [Discord](https://discord.gg/effect-ts) or posting a question to [Stackoverflow](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/tagged/effect-ts).
If you've found a bug, or Effect can't meet your needs, please try [raising an issue](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/issues).

## Arbitrary

### Arbitrary: Missing arbitrary annotation

This error occurs when trying to generate an `Arbitrary` instance for a schema that lacks a predefined way to generate sample values.
This commonly happens when the schema defines a custom type that the engine does not recognize.

To resolve this, add an `arbitrary` annotation that defines how to generate random instances of the custom type.

For more details, see [Customizing Arbitrary Data Generation](/docs/schema/arbitrary/#customizing-arbitrary-data-generation).

## JSONSchema

### JSONSchema: Missing jsonSchema annotation

This error occurs when attempting to generate a JSON Schema for a type that has no direct representation in JSON Schema, such as `bigint`.

To resolve this, add a `jsonSchema` annotation to specify how the type should be represented.

For refined schemas, ensure that each refinement includes a `jsonSchema` annotation that describes its constraints.

For more details, see [Customizing JSON Schema Generation](/docs/schema/json-schema/#customizing-json-schema-generation).

### JSONSchema: Missing identifier annotation for recursive schemas

This error occurs when generating a JSON Schema for a recursive or mutually recursive schema that lacks an `identifier` annotation.

Recursive schemas need a unique `identifier` annotation to ensure correct references in the generated JSON Schema. Without it, the schema generator cannot resolve the self-referencing structure.

To resolve this, ensure that recursive schemas include an `identifier` annotation.

For more details, see [Recursive and Mutually Recursive Schemas](/docs/schema/json-schema/#recursive-and-mutually-recursive-schemas).

### JSONSchema: Unsupported Post Rest Elements

This error occurs when generating a JSON Schema for a tuple that includes **post-rest elements**, elements appearing after a rest parameter.
JSON Schema does not support this structure.

**Example**

```ts twoslash
import { Schema } from "effect"

//             Element after a rest parameter ───┐
// Rest Parameter ────────────────┐              |
//                                ▼              ▼
const schema = Schema.Tuple([], Schema.Number, Schema.String)
```

### JSONSchema: Unsupported Key

This error occurs when attempting to generate a JSON Schema for a structure that includes unsupported key types, such as `symbol`.
JSON Schema only supports string-based keys.

**Example**

```ts twoslash
import { Schema } from "effect"

// Schema with a symbol key (not allowed in JSON Schema)
const schema = Schema.Struct({
  [Symbol.for("my-symbol")]: Schema.String
})
```

as there is no way to represent this in JSON Schema.
