content/docs/400-guides/640-concurrency/130-deferred.mdx, before:

---
title: Deferred
excerpt: Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet, consetetur sadipscing elitr, sed diam nonumy eirmod tempor invidunt ut labore.
---

A `Deferred<E, A>` is a special subtype of `Effect` that acts as a variable, but with some unique characteristics. It can only be set once, making it a powerful synchronization tool for managing asynchronous operations.

A `Deferred` is essentially a synchronization primitive that represents a value that may not be available immediately. When you create a `Deferred`, it starts with an empty value. Later on, you can complete it exactly once with either a success value (`A`) or a failure value (`E`). Once completed, a `Deferred` can never be modified or emptied again.

## Common Use Cases

`Deferred` becomes incredibly useful when you need to wait for something specific to happen in your program. It's ideal for scenarios where you want one part of your code to signal another part when it's ready. Here are a few common use cases:

- **Coordinating Fibers**: When you have multiple concurrent tasks (fibers) and need to coordinate their actions, `Deferred` can help one fiber signal to another when it has completed its task.

- **Synchronization**: Anytime you want to ensure that one piece of code doesn't proceed until another piece of code has finished its work, `Deferred` can provide the synchronization you need.

- **Handing Over Work**: You can use `Deferred` to hand over work from one fiber to another. For example, one fiber can prepare some data, and then a second fiber can continue processing it.

- **Suspending Execution**: When you want a fiber to pause its execution until some condition is met, a `Deferred` can be used to block it until the condition is satisfied.

When a fiber calls `await` on a `Deferred`, it essentially blocks until that `Deferred` is completed with either a value or an error. Importantly, in Effect, blocking fibers don't actually block the main thread; they block only semantically. While one fiber is blocked, the underlying thread can execute other fibers, ensuring efficient concurrency.

A `Deferred` in Effect is conceptually similar to JavaScript's `Promise`. The key difference is that `Deferred` has two type parameters (`E` and `A`) instead of just one. This allows `Deferred` to represent both successful results (`A`) and errors (`E`).

## Operations

### Creating

You can create a `Deferred` using `Deferred.make<E, A>(){:ts}`. This returns an `Effect<never, never, Deferred<E, A>>`, which describes the creation of a `Deferred`. Note that `Deferred`s can only be created within an `Effect` because creating them involves effectful memory allocation, which must be managed safely within an `Effect`.

### Awaiting

To retrieve a value from a `Deferred`, you can use `Deferred.await`. This operation suspends the calling fiber until the `Deferred` is completed with a value or an error.

```ts twoslash
import { Effect, Deferred } from "effect"

const effectDeferred = Deferred.make<Error, string>()

const effectGet = effectDeferred.pipe(
  Effect.flatMap((deferred) => Deferred.await(deferred))
)
```

### Completing

You can complete a `Deferred`[E, A] in different ways:

There are several ways to complete a `Deferred`:

- `Deferred.succeed`: Completes the `Deferred` successfully with a value of type `A`.
- `Deferred.done`: Completes the `Deferred` with an `Exit<E, A>` type.
- `Deferred.complete`: Completes the `Deferred` with the result of an effect `Effect<never, E, A>`.
- `Deferred.completeWith`: Completes the `Deferred` with an effect `Effect<never, E, A>`. This effect will be executed by each waiting fiber, so use it carefully.
- `Deferred.fail`: Fails the `Deferred` with an error of type `E`.
- `Deferred.die`: Defects the `Deferred` with a user-defined error.
- `Deferred.failCause`: Fails or defects the `Deferred` with a `Cause<E>`.
- `Deferred.interrupt`: Interrupts the `Deferred`. This can be used to forcefully stop or interrupt the waiting fibers.

Here's an example that demonstrates the usage of these completion methods:

```ts twoslash
import { Effect, Deferred, Exit, Cause } from "effect"

const program = Effect.gen(function* (_) {
  const deferred = yield* _(Deferred.make<string, number>())

  // Completing the Deferred in various ways
  yield* _(Deferred.succeed(deferred, 1).pipe(Effect.fork))
  yield* _(Deferred.complete(deferred, Effect.succeed(2)).pipe(Effect.fork))
  yield* _(
    Deferred.completeWith(deferred, Effect.succeed(3)).pipe(Effect.fork)
  )
  yield* _(Deferred.done(deferred, Exit.succeed(4)).pipe(Effect.fork))
  yield* _(Deferred.fail(deferred, "5").pipe(Effect.fork))
  yield* _(
    Deferred.failCause(deferred, Cause.die(new Error("6"))).pipe(Effect.fork)
  )
  yield* _(Deferred.die(deferred, new Error("7")).pipe(Effect.fork))
  yield* _(Deferred.interrupt(deferred).pipe(Effect.fork))

  // Awaiting the Deferred to get its value
  const value = yield* _(Deferred.await(deferred))
  return value
})

Effect.runPromise(program).then(console.log, console.error) // Output: 1
```

When you complete a `Deferred`, it results in an `Effect<never, never, boolean>`. This effect returns `true` if the `Deferred` value has been set and `false` if it was already set before completion. This can be useful for checking the state of the `Deferred`.

Here's an example demonstrating the state change of a `Deferred`:

```ts twoslash
import { Effect, Deferred } from "effect"

const program = Effect.gen(function* (_) {
  const deferred = yield* _(Deferred.make<string, number>())
  const b1 = yield* _(Deferred.fail(deferred, "oh no!"))
  const b2 = yield* _(Deferred.succeed(deferred, 1))
  return [b1, b2]
})

Effect.runPromise(program).then(console.log) // Output: [ true, false ]
```

### Polling

Sometimes, you may want to check whether a `Deferred` has been completed without causing the fiber to suspend. To achieve this, you can use the `Deferred.poll` method. Here's how it works:

- `Deferred.poll` returns an `Option<Effect<never, E, A>>`.
  - If the `Deferred` is not yet completed, it returns `None`.
  - If the `Deferred` is completed, it returns `Some`, which contains the result or error.

Additionally, you can use the `Deferred.isDone` method, which returns an `Effect<never, never, boolean>`. This effect evaluates to `true` if the `Deferred` is already completed, allowing you to quickly check the completion status.

Here's a practical example:

```ts twoslash
import { Effect, Deferred } from "effect"

const program = Effect.gen(function* (_) {
  const deferred = yield* _(Deferred.make<string, number>())

  // Polling the Deferred
  const done1 = yield* _(Deferred.poll(deferred))

  // Checking if the Deferred is already completed
  const done2 = yield* _(Deferred.isDone(deferred))

  return [done1, done2]
})

Effect.runPromise(program).then(console.log) // Output: [ none(), false ]
```

In this example, we first create a `Deferred` and then use `Deferred.poll` to check its completion status. Since it's not completed yet, `done1` is `none()`. We also use `Deferred.isDone` to confirm that the `Deferred` is indeed not completed, so `done2` is `false`.

## Example: Using Deferred to Coordinate Two Fibers

Here's a scenario where we use a `Deferred` to hand over a value between two fibers:

```ts twoslash
import { Effect, Deferred, Fiber } from "effect"

const program = Effect.gen(function* (_) {
  const deferred = yield* _(Deferred.make<string, string>())

  // Fiber A: Set the Deferred value after waiting for 1 second
  const sendHelloWorld = Effect.gen(function* (_) {
    yield* _(Effect.sleep("1 seconds"))
    return yield* _(Deferred.succeed(deferred, "hello world"))
  })

  // Fiber B: Wait for the Deferred and print the value
  const getAndPrint = Effect.gen(function* (_) {
    const s = yield* _(Deferred.await(deferred))
    console.log(s)
    return s
  })

  // Run both fibers concurrently
  const fiberA = yield* _(Effect.fork(sendHelloWorld))
  const fiberB = yield* _(Effect.fork(getAndPrint))

  // Wait for both fibers to complete
  return yield* _(Fiber.join(Fiber.zip(fiberA, fiberB)))
})

Effect.runPromise(program).then(console.log, console.error)
/*
Output:
hello world
[ true, "hello world" ]
*/
```

In this example, we have two fibers, `fiberA` and `fiberB`, that communicate using a `Deferred`:

- `fiberA` sets the `Deferred` value to "hello world" after waiting for 1 second.
- `fiberB` waits for the `Deferred` to be completed and then prints the received value to the console.

By running both fibers concurrently and using the `Deferred` as a synchronization point, we can ensure that `fiberB` only proceeds after `fiberA` has completed its task. This coordination mechanism allows you to hand over values or coordinate work between different parts of your program effectively.

Commit message:

replace excerpt placeholders with actual content (index pages excluded)

content/docs/400-guides/640-concurrency/130-deferred.mdx, after:

---
title: Deferred
excerpt: Explore the power of `Deferred` in Effect, a specialized subtype of `Effect` that acts as a one-time variable with unique characteristics. Discover how `Deferred` serves as a synchronization tool for managing asynchronous operations, allowing coordination between different parts of your code. Learn common use cases, including coordinating fibers, synchronization, handing over work, and suspending execution. Dive into operations such as creating, awaiting, completing, and polling `Deferred`, providing practical examples and scenarios to enhance your understanding of this powerful tool.
bottomNavigation: pagination
---

A `Deferred<E, A>` is a special subtype of `Effect` that acts as a variable, but with some unique characteristics. It can only be set once, making it a powerful synchronization tool for managing asynchronous operations.

A `Deferred` is essentially a synchronization primitive that represents a value that may not be available immediately. When you create a `Deferred`, it starts with an empty value. Later on, you can complete it exactly once with either a success value (`A`) or a failure value (`E`). Once completed, a `Deferred` can never be modified or emptied again.

## Common Use Cases

`Deferred` becomes incredibly useful when you need to wait for something specific to happen in your program. It's ideal for scenarios where you want one part of your code to signal another part when it's ready. Here are a few common use cases:

- **Coordinating Fibers**: When you have multiple concurrent tasks (fibers) and need to coordinate their actions, `Deferred` can help one fiber signal to another when it has completed its task.

- **Synchronization**: Anytime you want to ensure that one piece of code doesn't proceed until another piece of code has finished its work, `Deferred` can provide the synchronization you need.

- **Handing Over Work**: You can use `Deferred` to hand over work from one fiber to another. For example, one fiber can prepare some data, and then a second fiber can continue processing it.

- **Suspending Execution**: When you want a fiber to pause its execution until some condition is met, a `Deferred` can be used to block it until the condition is satisfied.

When a fiber calls `await` on a `Deferred`, it essentially blocks until that `Deferred` is completed with either a value or an error. Importantly, in Effect, blocking fibers don't actually block the main thread; they block only semantically. While one fiber is blocked, the underlying thread can execute other fibers, ensuring efficient concurrency.

A `Deferred` in Effect is conceptually similar to JavaScript's `Promise`. The key difference is that `Deferred` has two type parameters (`E` and `A`) instead of just one. This allows `Deferred` to represent both successful results (`A`) and errors (`E`).

## Operations

### Creating

You can create a `Deferred` using `Deferred.make<E, A>(){:ts}`. This returns an `Effect<never, never, Deferred<E, A>>`, which describes the creation of a `Deferred`. Note that `Deferred`s can only be created within an `Effect` because creating them involves effectful memory allocation, which must be managed safely within an `Effect`.

### Awaiting

To retrieve a value from a `Deferred`, you can use `Deferred.await`. This operation suspends the calling fiber until the `Deferred` is completed with a value or an error.

```ts twoslash
import { Effect, Deferred } from "effect"

const effectDeferred = Deferred.make<Error, string>()

const effectGet = effectDeferred.pipe(
  Effect.flatMap((deferred) => Deferred.await(deferred))
)
```

### Completing

You can complete a `Deferred`[E, A] in different ways:

There are several ways to complete a `Deferred`:

- `Deferred.succeed`: Completes the `Deferred` successfully with a value of type `A`.
- `Deferred.done`: Completes the `Deferred` with an `Exit<E, A>` type.
- `Deferred.complete`: Completes the `Deferred` with the result of an effect `Effect<never, E, A>`.
- `Deferred.completeWith`: Completes the `Deferred` with an effect `Effect<never, E, A>`. This effect will be executed by each waiting fiber, so use it carefully.
- `Deferred.fail`: Fails the `Deferred` with an error of type `E`.
- `Deferred.die`: Defects the `Deferred` with a user-defined error.
- `Deferred.failCause`: Fails or defects the `Deferred` with a `Cause<E>`.
- `Deferred.interrupt`: Interrupts the `Deferred`. This can be used to forcefully stop or interrupt the waiting fibers.

Here's an example that demonstrates the usage of these completion methods:

```ts twoslash
import { Effect, Deferred, Exit, Cause } from "effect"

const program = Effect.gen(function* (_) {
  const deferred = yield* _(Deferred.make<string, number>())

  // Completing the Deferred in various ways
  yield* _(Deferred.succeed(deferred, 1).pipe(Effect.fork))
  yield* _(Deferred.complete(deferred, Effect.succeed(2)).pipe(Effect.fork))
  yield* _(
    Deferred.completeWith(deferred, Effect.succeed(3)).pipe(Effect.fork)
  )
  yield* _(Deferred.done(deferred, Exit.succeed(4)).pipe(Effect.fork))
  yield* _(Deferred.fail(deferred, "5").pipe(Effect.fork))
  yield* _(
    Deferred.failCause(deferred, Cause.die(new Error("6"))).pipe(Effect.fork)
  )
  yield* _(Deferred.die(deferred, new Error("7")).pipe(Effect.fork))
  yield* _(Deferred.interrupt(deferred).pipe(Effect.fork))

  // Awaiting the Deferred to get its value
  const value = yield* _(Deferred.await(deferred))
  return value
})

Effect.runPromise(program).then(console.log, console.error) // Output: 1
```

When you complete a `Deferred`, it results in an `Effect<never, never, boolean>`. This effect returns `true` if the `Deferred` value has been set and `false` if it was already set before completion. This can be useful for checking the state of the `Deferred`.

Here's an example demonstrating the state change of a `Deferred`:

```ts twoslash
import { Effect, Deferred } from "effect"

const program = Effect.gen(function* (_) {
  const deferred = yield* _(Deferred.make<string, number>())
  const b1 = yield* _(Deferred.fail(deferred, "oh no!"))
  const b2 = yield* _(Deferred.succeed(deferred, 1))
  return [b1, b2]
})

Effect.runPromise(program).then(console.log) // Output: [ true, false ]
```

### Polling

Sometimes, you may want to check whether a `Deferred` has been completed without causing the fiber to suspend. To achieve this, you can use the `Deferred.poll` method. Here's how it works:

- `Deferred.poll` returns an `Option<Effect<never, E, A>>`.
  - If the `Deferred` is not yet completed, it returns `None`.
  - If the `Deferred` is completed, it returns `Some`, which contains the result or error.

Additionally, you can use the `Deferred.isDone` method, which returns an `Effect<never, never, boolean>`. This effect evaluates to `true` if the `Deferred` is already completed, allowing you to quickly check the completion status.

Here's a practical example:

```ts twoslash
import { Effect, Deferred } from "effect"

const program = Effect.gen(function* (_) {
  const deferred = yield* _(Deferred.make<string, number>())

  // Polling the Deferred
  const done1 = yield* _(Deferred.poll(deferred))

  // Checking if the Deferred is already completed
  const done2 = yield* _(Deferred.isDone(deferred))

  return [done1, done2]
})

Effect.runPromise(program).then(console.log) // Output: [ none(), false ]
```

In this example, we first create a `Deferred` and then use `Deferred.poll` to check its completion status. Since it's not completed yet, `done1` is `none()`. We also use `Deferred.isDone` to confirm that the `Deferred` is indeed not completed, so `done2` is `false`.

## Example: Using Deferred to Coordinate Two Fibers

Here's a scenario where we use a `Deferred` to hand over a value between two fibers:

```ts twoslash
import { Effect, Deferred, Fiber } from "effect"

const program = Effect.gen(function* (_) {
  const deferred = yield* _(Deferred.make<string, string>())

  // Fiber A: Set the Deferred value after waiting for 1 second
  const sendHelloWorld = Effect.gen(function* (_) {
    yield* _(Effect.sleep("1 seconds"))
    return yield* _(Deferred.succeed(deferred, "hello world"))
  })

  // Fiber B: Wait for the Deferred and print the value
  const getAndPrint = Effect.gen(function* (_) {
    const s = yield* _(Deferred.await(deferred))
    console.log(s)
    return s
  })

  // Run both fibers concurrently
  const fiberA = yield* _(Effect.fork(sendHelloWorld))
  const fiberB = yield* _(Effect.fork(getAndPrint))

  // Wait for both fibers to complete
  return yield* _(Fiber.join(Fiber.zip(fiberA, fiberB)))
})

Effect.runPromise(program).then(console.log, console.error)
/*
Output:
hello world
[ true, "hello world" ]
*/
```

In this example, we have two fibers, `fiberA` and `fiberB`, that communicate using a `Deferred`:

- `fiberA` sets the `Deferred` value to "hello world" after waiting for 1 second.
- `fiberB` waits for the `Deferred` to be completed and then prints the received value to the console.

By running both fibers concurrently and using the `Deferred` as a synchronization point, we can ensure that `fiberB` only proceeds after `fiberA` has completed its task. This coordination mechanism allows you to hand over values or coordinate work between different parts of your program effectively.
