content/docs/400-guides/640-concurrency/140-queue.mdx, before:

---
title: Queue
excerpt: Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet, consetetur sadipscing elitr, sed diam nonumy eirmod tempor invidunt ut labore.
---

A `Queue` is a lightweight in-memory queue built on Effect with composable and transparent back-pressure.
It is fully asynchronous (no locks or blocking), purely-functional and type-safe.

## Basic Operations

A `Queue<A>` stores values of type `A` and provides two fundamental operations:

- `Queue.offer`: This operation adds a value of type `A` to the `Queue`.
- `Queue.take`: It removes and returns the oldest value from the `Queue`.

Here's an example demonstrating these basic operations:

```ts twoslash
import { Effect, Queue } from "effect"

const program = Effect.gen(function* (_) {
  const queue = yield* _(Queue.bounded<number>(100))
  yield* _(Queue.offer(queue, 1)) // Add 1 to the queue
  const value = yield* _(Queue.take(queue)) // Retrieve and remove the oldest value
  return value
})

Effect.runPromise(program).then(console.log) // Output: 1
```

## Creating a Queue

A `Queue` can have bounded (limited capacity) or unbounded storage. Depending on your requirements, you can choose from various strategies to handle new values when the queue reaches its capacity.

### Bounded Queue

A bounded queue provides back-pressure when it's full. This means that if the queue is full, any attempt to add more items will be suspended until there's space available.

```ts twoslash
import { Queue } from "effect"

// Creating a bounded queue with a capacity of 100
const boundedQueue = Queue.bounded<number>(100)
```

### Dropping Queue

A dropping queue simply drops new items when it's full. It doesn't wait for space to become available.

```ts twoslash
import { Queue } from "effect"

// Creating a dropping queue with a capacity of 100
const droppingQueue = Queue.dropping<number>(100)
```

### Sliding Queue

A sliding queue removes old items when it's full to accommodate new ones.

```ts twoslash
import { Queue } from "effect"

// Creating a sliding queue with a capacity of 100
const slidingQueue = Queue.sliding<number>(100)
```

### Unbounded Queue

An unbounded queue has no capacity limit.

```ts twoslash
import { Queue } from "effect"

// Creating an unbounded queue
const unboundedQueue = Queue.unbounded<number>()
```

## Adding Items to a Queue

To add a value to the queue, you can use the `Queue.offer` operation:

```ts twoslash
import { Effect, Queue } from "effect"

const program = Effect.gen(function* (_) {
  const queue = yield* _(Queue.bounded<number>(100))
  yield* _(Queue.offer(queue, 1)) // put 1 in the queue
})
```

If you're using a back-pressured queue and it's full, the `offer` operation might suspend. In such cases, you can use `Effect.fork` to wait in a different execution context (fiber).

```ts twoslash
import { Effect, Queue, Fiber } from "effect"

const program = Effect.gen(function* (_) {
  const queue = yield* _(Queue.bounded<number>(1))
  yield* _(Queue.offer(queue, 1))
  const fiber = yield* _(Effect.fork(Queue.offer(queue, 2))) // will be suspended because the queue is full
  yield* _(Queue.take(queue))
  yield* _(Fiber.join(fiber))
})
```

You can also add multiple values at once using `Queue.offerAll`:

```ts twoslash
import { Effect, Queue, ReadonlyArray } from "effect"

const program = Effect.gen(function* (_) {
  const queue = yield* _(Queue.bounded<number>(100))
  const items = ReadonlyArray.range(1, 10)
  yield* _(Queue.offerAll(queue, items))
  return yield* _(Queue.size(queue))
})

Effect.runPromise(program).then(console.log) // Output: 10
```

## Consuming Items from a Queue

The `Queue.take` operation removes the oldest item from the queue and returns it. If the queue is empty, it will suspend and resume only when an item is added to the queue. You can also use `Effect.fork` to wait for the value in a different execution context (fiber).

```ts twoslash
import { Effect, Queue, Fiber } from "effect"

const oldestItem = Effect.gen(function* (_) {
  const queue = yield* _(Queue.bounded<string>(100))
  const fiber = yield* _(Effect.fork(Queue.take(queue))) // will be suspended because the queue is empty
  yield* _(Queue.offer(queue, "something"))
  const value = yield* _(Fiber.join(fiber))
  return value
})

Effect.runPromise(oldestItem).then(console.log) // Output: something
```

You can retrieve the first item using `Queue.poll`. If the queue is empty, you'll get `None`; otherwise, the top item will be wrapped in `Some`.

```ts twoslash
import { Effect, Queue } from "effect"

const polled = Effect.gen(function* (_) {
  const queue = yield* _(Queue.bounded<number>(100))
  yield* _(Queue.offer(queue, 10))
  yield* _(Queue.offer(queue, 20))
  const head = yield* _(Queue.poll(queue))
  return head
})

Effect.runPromise(polled).then(console.log)
/*
Output:
{
  _id: "Option",
  _tag: "Some",
  value: 10
}
*/
```

You can retrieve multiple items at once using `Queue.takeUpTo`. If the queue doesn't have enough items to return, it will return all the available items without waiting for more offers.

```ts twoslash
import { Effect, Queue } from "effect"

const polled = Effect.gen(function* (_) {
  const queue = yield* _(Queue.bounded<number>(100))
  yield* _(Queue.offer(queue, 10))
  yield* _(Queue.offer(queue, 20))
  yield* _(Queue.offer(queue, 30))
  const chunk = yield* _(Queue.takeUpTo(queue, 2))
  return chunk
})

Effect.runPromise(polled).then(console.log)
/*
Output:
{
  _id: "Chunk",
  values: [ 10, 20 ]
}
*/
```

Similarly, you can retrieve all items at once using `Queue.takeAll`. It returns immediately, providing an empty collection if the queue is empty.

```ts twoslash
import { Effect, Queue } from "effect"

const polled = Effect.gen(function* (_) {
  const queue = yield* _(Queue.bounded<number>(100))
  yield* _(Queue.offer(queue, 10))
  yield* _(Queue.offer(queue, 20))
  yield* _(Queue.offer(queue, 30))
  const chunk = yield* _(Queue.takeAll(queue))
  return chunk
})

Effect.runPromise(polled).then(console.log)
/*
Output:
{
  _id: "Chunk",
  values: [ 10, 20, 30 ]
}
*/
```

## Shutting Down a Queue

With `Queue.shutdown`, you can interrupt all fibers that are suspended on `offer*` or `take*`. It also empties the queue and causes all future `offer*` and `take*` calls to terminate immediately.

```ts twoslash
import { Effect, Queue, Fiber } from "effect"

const program = Effect.gen(function* (_) {
  const queue = yield* _(Queue.bounded<number>(3))
  const fiber = yield* _(Effect.fork(Queue.take(queue)))
  yield* _(Queue.shutdown(queue)) // will interrupt fiber
  yield* _(Fiber.join(fiber)) // will terminate
})
```

You can use `Queue.awaitShutdown` to execute an effect when the queue is shut down. This function waits until the queue is shut down, and if it's already shut down, it resumes immediately.

```ts twoslash
import { Effect, Queue, Fiber, Console } from "effect"

const program = Effect.gen(function* (_) {
  const queue = yield* _(Queue.bounded<number>(3))
  const fiber = yield* _(
    Effect.fork(
      Queue.awaitShutdown(queue).pipe(
        Effect.flatMap(() => Console.log("shutting down"))
      )
    )
  )
  yield* _(Queue.shutdown(queue))
  yield* _(Fiber.join(fiber))
})

Effect.runPromise(program) // Output: shutting down
```

## Offer-only / Take-only Queues

In some situations, you may need specific parts of your code to have exclusive capabilities, such as only offering values (`Enqueue`) or only taking values (`Dequeue`) from a queue. Effect provides a straightforward way to achieve this.

All operations related to offering values are defined by the `Enqueue` interface. Here's an example of how to use it:

```ts twoslash
import { Queue } from "effect"

const send = (offerOnlyQueue: Queue.Enqueue<number>, value: number) => {
  // This enqueue can only be used to offer values

  // @ts-expect-error
  Queue.take(offerOnlyQueue)

  // Ok
  return Queue.offer(offerOnlyQueue, value)
}
```

Similarly, all operations related to taking values are defined by the `Dequeue` interface. Here's an example:

```ts twoslash
import { Queue } from "effect"

const receive = (takeOnlyQueue: Queue.Dequeue<number>) => {
  // This dequeue can only be used to take values

  // @ts-expect-error
  Queue.offer(takeOnlyQueue, 1)

  // Ok
  return Queue.take(takeOnlyQueue)
}
```

The `Queue` type extends both `Enqueue` and `Dequeue`, allowing you to conveniently pass it to different parts of your code where you want to enforce either `Enqueue` or `Dequeue` behavior:

```ts twoslash
import { Effect, Queue } from "effect"

const send = (offerOnlyQueue: Queue.Enqueue<number>, value: number) => {
  return Queue.offer(offerOnlyQueue, value)
}

const receive = (takeOnlyQueue: Queue.Dequeue<number>) => {
  return Queue.take(takeOnlyQueue)
}

const program = Effect.gen(function* (_) {
  const queue = yield* _(Queue.unbounded<number>())

  // Offer values to the queue
  yield* _(send(queue, 1))
  yield* _(send(queue, 2))

  // Take values from the queue
  console.log(yield* _(receive(queue)))
  console.log(yield* _(receive(queue)))
})

Effect.runPromise(program)
/*
Output:
1
2
*/
```

Commit message:

replace excerpt placeholders with actual content (index pages excluded) (#424)

content/docs/400-guides/640-concurrency/140-queue.mdx, after:

---
title: Queue
excerpt: Explore the lightweight, in-memory `Queue` in Effect, designed for composable and transparent back-pressure. Learn about its fully asynchronous, purely-functional, and type-safe characteristics. Delve into basic operations, creating different types of queues, and efficiently adding and consuming items. Discover how to shut down a queue gracefully and handle exclusive capabilities with offer-only and take-only queues. Enhance your understanding of `Queue` and leverage its power for seamless coordination in your asynchronous workflows.
bottomNavigation: pagination
---

A `Queue` is a lightweight in-memory queue built on Effect with composable and transparent back-pressure.
It is fully asynchronous (no locks or blocking), purely-functional and type-safe.

## Basic Operations

A `Queue<A>` stores values of type `A` and provides two fundamental operations:

- `Queue.offer`: This operation adds a value of type `A` to the `Queue`.
- `Queue.take`: It removes and returns the oldest value from the `Queue`.

Here's an example demonstrating these basic operations:

```ts twoslash
import { Effect, Queue } from "effect"

const program = Effect.gen(function* (_) {
  const queue = yield* _(Queue.bounded<number>(100))
  yield* _(Queue.offer(queue, 1)) // Add 1 to the queue
  const value = yield* _(Queue.take(queue)) // Retrieve and remove the oldest value
  return value
})

Effect.runPromise(program).then(console.log) // Output: 1
```

## Creating a Queue

A `Queue` can have bounded (limited capacity) or unbounded storage. Depending on your requirements, you can choose from various strategies to handle new values when the queue reaches its capacity.

### Bounded Queue

A bounded queue provides back-pressure when it's full. This means that if the queue is full, any attempt to add more items will be suspended until there's space available.

```ts twoslash
import { Queue } from "effect"

// Creating a bounded queue with a capacity of 100
const boundedQueue = Queue.bounded<number>(100)
```

### Dropping Queue

A dropping queue simply drops new items when it's full. It doesn't wait for space to become available.

```ts twoslash
import { Queue } from "effect"

// Creating a dropping queue with a capacity of 100
const droppingQueue = Queue.dropping<number>(100)
```

### Sliding Queue

A sliding queue removes old items when it's full to accommodate new ones.

```ts twoslash
import { Queue } from "effect"

// Creating a sliding queue with a capacity of 100
const slidingQueue = Queue.sliding<number>(100)
```

### Unbounded Queue

An unbounded queue has no capacity limit.

```ts twoslash
import { Queue } from "effect"

// Creating an unbounded queue
const unboundedQueue = Queue.unbounded<number>()
```

## Adding Items to a Queue

To add a value to the queue, you can use the `Queue.offer` operation:

```ts twoslash
import { Effect, Queue } from "effect"

const program = Effect.gen(function* (_) {
  const queue = yield* _(Queue.bounded<number>(100))
  yield* _(Queue.offer(queue, 1)) // put 1 in the queue
})
```

If you're using a back-pressured queue and it's full, the `offer` operation might suspend. In such cases, you can use `Effect.fork` to wait in a different execution context (fiber).

```ts twoslash
import { Effect, Queue, Fiber } from "effect"

const program = Effect.gen(function* (_) {
  const queue = yield* _(Queue.bounded<number>(1))
  yield* _(Queue.offer(queue, 1))
  const fiber = yield* _(Effect.fork(Queue.offer(queue, 2))) // will be suspended because the queue is full
  yield* _(Queue.take(queue))
  yield* _(Fiber.join(fiber))
})
```

You can also add multiple values at once using `Queue.offerAll`:

```ts twoslash
import { Effect, Queue, ReadonlyArray } from "effect"

const program = Effect.gen(function* (_) {
  const queue = yield* _(Queue.bounded<number>(100))
  const items = ReadonlyArray.range(1, 10)
  yield* _(Queue.offerAll(queue, items))
  return yield* _(Queue.size(queue))
})

Effect.runPromise(program).then(console.log) // Output: 10
```

## Consuming Items from a Queue

The `Queue.take` operation removes the oldest item from the queue and returns it. If the queue is empty, it will suspend and resume only when an item is added to the queue. You can also use `Effect.fork` to wait for the value in a different execution context (fiber).

```ts twoslash
import { Effect, Queue, Fiber } from "effect"

const oldestItem = Effect.gen(function* (_) {
  const queue = yield* _(Queue.bounded<string>(100))
  const fiber = yield* _(Effect.fork(Queue.take(queue))) // will be suspended because the queue is empty
  yield* _(Queue.offer(queue, "something"))
  const value = yield* _(Fiber.join(fiber))
  return value
})

Effect.runPromise(oldestItem).then(console.log) // Output: something
```

You can retrieve the first item using `Queue.poll`. If the queue is empty, you'll get `None`; otherwise, the top item will be wrapped in `Some`.

```ts twoslash
import { Effect, Queue } from "effect"

const polled = Effect.gen(function* (_) {
  const queue = yield* _(Queue.bounded<number>(100))
  yield* _(Queue.offer(queue, 10))
  yield* _(Queue.offer(queue, 20))
  const head = yield* _(Queue.poll(queue))
  return head
})

Effect.runPromise(polled).then(console.log)
/*
Output:
{
  _id: "Option",
  _tag: "Some",
  value: 10
}
*/
```

You can retrieve multiple items at once using `Queue.takeUpTo`. If the queue doesn't have enough items to return, it will return all the available items without waiting for more offers.

```ts twoslash
import { Effect, Queue } from "effect"

const polled = Effect.gen(function* (_) {
  const queue = yield* _(Queue.bounded<number>(100))
  yield* _(Queue.offer(queue, 10))
  yield* _(Queue.offer(queue, 20))
  yield* _(Queue.offer(queue, 30))
  const chunk = yield* _(Queue.takeUpTo(queue, 2))
  return chunk
})

Effect.runPromise(polled).then(console.log)
/*
Output:
{
  _id: "Chunk",
  values: [ 10, 20 ]
}
*/
```

Similarly, you can retrieve all items at once using `Queue.takeAll`. It returns immediately, providing an empty collection if the queue is empty.

```ts twoslash
import { Effect, Queue } from "effect"

const polled = Effect.gen(function* (_) {
  const queue = yield* _(Queue.bounded<number>(100))
  yield* _(Queue.offer(queue, 10))
  yield* _(Queue.offer(queue, 20))
  yield* _(Queue.offer(queue, 30))
  const chunk = yield* _(Queue.takeAll(queue))
  return chunk
})

Effect.runPromise(polled).then(console.log)
/*
Output:
{
  _id: "Chunk",
  values: [ 10, 20, 30 ]
}
*/
```

## Shutting Down a Queue

With `Queue.shutdown`, you can interrupt all fibers that are suspended on `offer*` or `take*`. It also empties the queue and causes all future `offer*` and `take*` calls to terminate immediately.

```ts twoslash
import { Effect, Queue, Fiber } from "effect"

const program = Effect.gen(function* (_) {
  const queue = yield* _(Queue.bounded<number>(3))
  const fiber = yield* _(Effect.fork(Queue.take(queue)))
  yield* _(Queue.shutdown(queue)) // will interrupt fiber
  yield* _(Fiber.join(fiber)) // will terminate
})
```

You can use `Queue.awaitShutdown` to execute an effect when the queue is shut down. This function waits until the queue is shut down, and if it's already shut down, it resumes immediately.

```ts twoslash
import { Effect, Queue, Fiber, Console } from "effect"

const program = Effect.gen(function* (_) {
  const queue = yield* _(Queue.bounded<number>(3))
  const fiber = yield* _(
    Effect.fork(
      Queue.awaitShutdown(queue).pipe(
        Effect.flatMap(() => Console.log("shutting down"))
      )
    )
  )
  yield* _(Queue.shutdown(queue))
  yield* _(Fiber.join(fiber))
})

Effect.runPromise(program) // Output: shutting down
```

## Offer-only / Take-only Queues

In some situations, you may need specific parts of your code to have exclusive capabilities, such as only offering values (`Enqueue`) or only taking values (`Dequeue`) from a queue. Effect provides a straightforward way to achieve this.

All operations related to offering values are defined by the `Enqueue` interface. Here's an example of how to use it:

```ts twoslash
import { Queue } from "effect"

const send = (offerOnlyQueue: Queue.Enqueue<number>, value: number) => {
  // This enqueue can only be used to offer values

  // @ts-expect-error
  Queue.take(offerOnlyQueue)

  // Ok
  return Queue.offer(offerOnlyQueue, value)
}
```

Similarly, all operations related to taking values are defined by the `Dequeue` interface. Here's an example:

```ts twoslash
import { Queue } from "effect"

const receive = (takeOnlyQueue: Queue.Dequeue<number>) => {
  // This dequeue can only be used to take values

  // @ts-expect-error
  Queue.offer(takeOnlyQueue, 1)

  // Ok
  return Queue.take(takeOnlyQueue)
}
```

The `Queue` type extends both `Enqueue` and `Dequeue`, allowing you to conveniently pass it to different parts of your code where you want to enforce either `Enqueue` or `Dequeue` behavior:

```ts twoslash
import { Effect, Queue } from "effect"

const send = (offerOnlyQueue: Queue.Enqueue<number>, value: number) => {
  return Queue.offer(offerOnlyQueue, value)
}

const receive = (takeOnlyQueue: Queue.Dequeue<number>) => {
  return Queue.take(takeOnlyQueue)
}

const program = Effect.gen(function* (_) {
  const queue = yield* _(Queue.unbounded<number>())

  // Offer values to the queue
  yield* _(send(queue, 1))
  yield* _(send(queue, 2))

  // Take values from the queue
  console.log(yield* _(receive(queue)))
  console.log(yield* _(receive(queue)))
})

Effect.runPromise(program)
/*
Output:
1
2
*/
```
