content/docs/400-guides/200-context-management/100-services.mdx, before:

---
title: Managing Services
excerpt: Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet, consetetur sadipscing elitr, sed diam nonumy eirmod tempor invidunt ut labore.
bottomNavigation: pagination
---

In the context of programming, a service refers to a reusable component or functionality that can be used by different parts of an application. Services are designed to provide specific capabilities and can be shared across multiple modules or components.

Services often encapsulate common tasks or operations that are needed by different parts of an application. They can handle complex operations, interact with external systems or APIs, manage data, or perform other specialized tasks.

Services are typically designed to be modular and decoupled from the rest of the application. This allows them to be easily maintained, tested, and replaced without affecting the overall functionality of the application.

When working with services in Effect, it is important to understand the concept of context: in the type `Effect<R, E, A>`, the parameter `R` represents the contextual data required by the effect to be executed. This contextual data is stored in a collection called `Context`.

## Managing Services with Effects

So far, we have been working with effects that don't require any specific context. In those cases, the `R` parameter in the `Effect<R, E, A>` type has always been of type `never`.
However, there are situations where we need to work with effects that depend on specific services or contextual data.

In this guide, we will learn how to:

- Create Effects that depend on a specific context.
- Work with Effects that require a context or service dependencies.
- Provide the required context to the Effect.

Understanding how to manage services and provide the necessary context to effects is essential for building more complex and customizable programs. Let's dive in and explore these concepts in detail.

## Creating a Simple Service

Let's start by creating a service for a random number generator.

To create a new service, three things are needed:

- A unique identifier at the type level (`Random`).
- An interface describing the possible operations of the service (`RandomShape`).
- A unique identifier at the runtime level (`"MyRandomServiceIdentifier"`).

```twoslash include service
import { Effect, Context } from "effect"

// Define an interface named 'Random' to represent the service
export interface Random {
  readonly _: unique symbol // Unique symbol to ensure type-level uniqueness
}

// Define another interface 'RandomShape' to represent the operations of the 'Random' service
export interface RandomShape {
  readonly next: Effect.Effect<never, never, number>
}

// Create a 'Tag' for the 'Random' service
export const Random = Context.Tag<Random, RandomShape>("MyRandomServiceIdentifier")
```

```ts filename="service.ts" twoslash
// @include: service
```

The `Random` value is what is referred to as a "Tag" in Effect.
It serves as a representation of the `Random` service and allows Effect to locate and use this service at runtime.

Conceptually, we can start building a mental model of the context of an effect by thinking of it as a `Map`:

```ts
Map<Tag, ServiceImpl>
```

Where the Tag acts as the "key" to the service implementation within the context.

## Using the Service

Now that we have our service tag defined, let's see how we can use it by building a pipeline.

<Tabs items={["Using Effect.gen", "Using pipe"]}>
<Tab>

```ts twoslash
// @filename: service.ts
// @include: service

// @filename: index.ts
// ---cut---
import { Effect } from "effect"
import { Random } from "./service"

const program = Effect.gen(function* (_) {
  const random = yield* _(Random)
  const randomNumber = yield* _(random.next)
  console.log(`random number: ${randomNumber}`)
})
```

In the code above, we can observe that we are able to yield the `Random` Tag as if it were an `Effect` itself.
This allows us to access the `next` operation of the service.
We then use the `console.log` utility to log the generated random number.

</Tab>
<Tab>

```ts twoslash
// @filename: service.ts
// @include: service

// @filename: index.ts
// ---cut---
import { Effect, Console } from "effect"
import { Random } from "./service"

const program = Random.pipe(
  Effect.flatMap((random) => random.next),
  Effect.flatMap((randomNumber) =>
    Console.log(`random number: ${randomNumber}`)
  )
)
```

In the code above, we can observe that we are able to flat-map over the `Random` Tag as if it were an Effect itself.
This allows us to access the `next` operation of the service within the `flatMap` callback.
We then use the `Console.log` utility to log the generated random number.

</Tab>
</Tabs>

It's worth noting that the type of the `program` variable includes `Random` in the `R` type parameter:

```ts
Effect<Random, never, void>
```

This indicates that our program requires the `Random` service to be provided in order to execute successfully.

If we attempt to execute the effect without providing the necessary service we will encounter a type-checking error:

```ts twoslash
// @errors: 2345
// @include: service

const program = Effect.gen(function* (_) {
  const random = yield* _(Random)
  const randomNumber = yield* _(random.next)
  console.log(`random number: ${randomNumber}`)
})

// ---cut---
Effect.runSync(program)
```

To resolve this error and successfully execute the program, we need to provide an actual implementation of the `Random` service.

In the next section, we will explore how to implement and provide the `Random` service to our program, enabling us to run it successfully.

## Providing a Service implementation

In order to provide an actual implementation of the `Random` service, we can utilize the `Effect.provideService` function.

```ts twoslash
// @include: service

const program = Effect.gen(function* (_) {
  const random = yield* _(Random)
  const randomNumber = yield* _(random.next)
  console.log(`random number: ${randomNumber}`)
})

// ---cut---
const runnable = Effect.provideService(program, Random, {
  next: Effect.sync(() => Math.random())
})

Effect.runPromise(runnable)
/*
Output:
random number: 0.8241872233134417
*/
```

In the code snippet above, we call the `program` that we defined earlier and provide it with an implementation of the `Random` service.
We use the `Effect.provideService(effect, tag, implementation){:ts}` function to associate the `Random` tag with its implementation, an object with a `next` operation that generates a random number.

Notice that the `R` type parameter of the `runnable` effect is now `never`. This indicates that the effect no longer requires any context to be provided. With the implementation of the `Random` service in place, we are able to run the program without any further dependencies.

By calling `Effect.runPromise(runnable){:ts}`, the program is executed, and the resulting output can be observed on the console.

## Inferring the Shape

A commonly used pattern to simplify the process of defining a tag involves inferring the shape of the service from the implementation constructor. Here's an example:

```ts twoslash
import { Effect, Context } from "effect"

interface Random {
  readonly _: unique symbol
}

const randomImpl = {
  next: Effect.sync(() => Math.random())
}

const Random = Context.Tag<Random, typeof randomImpl>(
  "MyRandomServiceIdentifier"
)

const program = Effect.gen(function* (_) {
  const random = yield* _(Random)
  const randomNumber = yield* _(random.next)
  console.log(`random number: ${randomNumber}`)
})

const runnable = Effect.provideService(program, Random, randomImpl)
```

As you can see, the shape of the `Random` service is inferred from the implementation (`typeof randomImpl`), reducing the burden of explicitly defining it.

## Using Multiple Services

When we require the usage of more than one service, the process remains similar to what we've learned in defining a service, repeated for each service needed. Let's examine an example where we need two services, namely `Random` and `Logger`:

<Tabs items={["Using Effect.gen", "Using pipe"]}>
<Tab>

```twoslash include random-logger
import { Effect, Context } from "effect"

interface Random {
  readonly _: unique symbol
}

interface RandomShape {
  readonly next: Effect.Effect<never, never, number>
}

// Create a 'Tag' for the 'Random' service
const Random = Context.Tag<Random, RandomShape>("MyRandomServiceIdentifier")

interface Logger {
  readonly _: unique symbol
}

interface LoggerShape {
  readonly log: (message: string) => Effect.Effect<never, never, void>
}

// Create a 'Tag' for the 'Logger' service
const Logger = Context.Tag<Logger, LoggerShape>("MyLoggerServiceIdentifier")
```

```ts twoslash
// @include: random-logger

const program = Effect.gen(function* (_) {
  // Acquire instances of the 'Random' and 'Logger' services
  const random = yield* _(Random)
  const logger = yield* _(Logger)

  // Generate a random number using the 'Random' service
  const randomNumber = yield* _(random.next)

  // Log the random number using the 'Logger' service
  return yield* _(logger.log(String(randomNumber)))
})
```

</Tab>
<Tab>

```ts twoslash
// @include: random-logger

const program =
  // Acquire instances of the 'Random' and 'Logger' services
  Effect.all([Random, Logger]).pipe(
    Effect.flatMap(([random, logger]) =>
      // Generate a random number using the 'Random' service
      random.next.pipe(
        Effect.flatMap((randomNumber) =>
          // Log the random number using the 'Logger' service
          logger.log(String(randomNumber))
        )
      )
    )
  )
```

</Tab>
</Tabs>

In the code above, we define two service interfaces: `RandomShape` and `LoggerShape`. Each interface represents a different service with its own set of operations.

The `program` effect now has an `R` type parameter of `Random | Logger`, indicating that it requires both the `Random` and `Logger` services to be provided.

```ts
Effect<Random | Logger, never, void>
```

To execute the `program`, we need to provide implementations for both services:

```ts twoslash
// @include: random-logger

const program = Effect.gen(function* (_) {
  const random = yield* _(Random)
  const logger = yield* _(Logger)
  const randomNumber = yield* _(random.next)
  return yield* _(logger.log(String(randomNumber)))
})

// ---cut---
import { Console } from "effect"

// Provide service implementations for 'Random' and 'Logger'
const runnable1 = program.pipe(
  Effect.provideService(Random, {
    next: Effect.sync(() => Math.random())
  }),
  Effect.provideService(Logger, {
    log: Console.log
  })
)
```

Alternatively, instead of calling `provideService` multiple times, we can combine the service implementations into a single `Context` and then provide the entire context using the `Effect.provide` function:

```ts twoslash
// @include: random-logger

const program = Effect.gen(function* (_) {
  const random = yield* _(Random)
  const logger = yield* _(Logger)
  const randomNumber = yield* _(random.next)
  return yield* _(logger.log(String(randomNumber)))
})

// ---cut---
import { Console } from "effect"

// Combine service implementations into a single 'Context'
const context = Context.empty().pipe(
  Context.add(Random, { next: Effect.sync(() => Math.random()) }),
  Context.add(Logger, {
    log: Console.log
  })
)

// Provide the entire context to the 'program'
const runnable2 = Effect.provide(program, context)
```

By providing the necessary implementations for each service, we ensure that the runnable effect can access and utilize both services when it is executed.

## Optional Services

There are situations where we may want to access a service implementation only if it is available.
In such cases, we can use the `Effect.serviceOption(tag){:ts}` function to handle this scenario.

The `serviceOption` function returns an implementation that can is available only if it is actually provided before executing this effect.
To represent this optionality it returns an `Option` of the implementation:

```ts
Effect<never, never, Option<Random>>
```

Let's take a look at an example that demonstrates the usage of optional services:

<Tabs items={["Using Effect.gen", "Using pipe"]}>
<Tab>

To determine what action to take, we can use the `Option.isNone` function provided by the `Option` module. This function allows us to check if the service is available or not by returning `true` when the service is not available.

```ts twoslash
// @filename: service.ts
// @include: service

// @filename: index.ts
// ---cut---
import { Effect, Option } from "effect"
import { Random } from "./service"

const program = Effect.gen(function* (_) {
  const maybeRandom = yield* _(Effect.serviceOption(Random))
  const randomNumber = Option.isNone(maybeRandom)
    ? // the service is not available, return a default value
      -1
    : // the service is available
      yield* _(maybeRandom.value.next)
  console.log(randomNumber)
})
```

</Tab>
<Tab>

To determine if we can use the service, we can use the `Option.match` function provided by the `Option` module. This function allows us to perform different actions based on whether the service is available or not. It takes two callbacks as arguments: one for the case when the service is not available, and another for the case when it is available.

```ts twoslash
// @filename: service.ts
// @include: service

// @filename: index.ts
// ---cut---
import { Effect, Option, Console } from "effect"
import { Random } from "./service"

const program = Effect.serviceOption(Random).pipe(
  Effect.flatMap((maybeRandom) =>
    Option.match(maybeRandom, {
      // the service is not available, return a default value
      onNone: () => Effect.succeed(-1),
      // the service is available
      onSome: (random) => random.next
    })
  ),
  Effect.flatMap((randomNumber) => Console.log(`${randomNumber}`))
)
```

</Tab>
</Tabs>

In the code above, we can observe that the `R` type parameter of the `program` effect is `never`, even though we are working with a service. This allows us to access something from the context only if it is actually provided before executing this effect.

When we run the `program` effect without providing the `Random` service:

```ts
Effect.runPromise(program).then(console.log)
// Output: -1
```

We see that the log message contains `-1`, which is the default value we provided when the service was not available.

However, if we provide the `Random` service implementation:

```ts
Effect.runPromise(
  Effect.provideService(program, Random, {
    next: Effect.sync(() => Math.random())
  })
).then(console.log)
// Output: 0.9957979486841035
```

We can observe that the log message now contains a random number generated by the `next` operation of the `Random` service.

By using the `Effect.serviceOption` function, we can gracefully handle scenarios where a service may or may not be available, providing flexibility in our programs.

In the upcoming section, we will delve into the topic of [Layers](layers). Layers are powerful constructs for creating services and composing them together, enabling us to build complex dependency graphs that can be seamlessly provided to Effects.

Commit message:

replace excerpt placeholders with actual content (index pages excluded) (#424)

content/docs/400-guides/200-context-management/100-services.mdx, after:

---
title: Managing Services
excerpt: Understand the concept of services in Effect programming, reusable components designed to provide specific capabilities across an application. Learn how to manage services with effects, create service interfaces, and provide service implementations. Explore the use of optional services for added flexibility in handling scenarios where a service may or may not be available.
bottomNavigation: pagination
---

In the context of programming, a service refers to a reusable component or functionality that can be used by different parts of an application. Services are designed to provide specific capabilities and can be shared across multiple modules or components.

Services often encapsulate common tasks or operations that are needed by different parts of an application. They can handle complex operations, interact with external systems or APIs, manage data, or perform other specialized tasks.

Services are typically designed to be modular and decoupled from the rest of the application. This allows them to be easily maintained, tested, and replaced without affecting the overall functionality of the application.

When working with services in Effect, it is important to understand the concept of context: in the type `Effect<R, E, A>`, the parameter `R` represents the contextual data required by the effect to be executed. This contextual data is stored in a collection called `Context`.

## Managing Services with Effects

So far, we have been working with effects that don't require any specific context. In those cases, the `R` parameter in the `Effect<R, E, A>` type has always been of type `never`.
However, there are situations where we need to work with effects that depend on specific services or contextual data.

In this guide, we will learn how to:

- Create Effects that depend on a specific context.
- Work with Effects that require a context or service dependencies.
- Provide the required context to the Effect.

Understanding how to manage services and provide the necessary context to effects is essential for building more complex and customizable programs. Let's dive in and explore these concepts in detail.

## Creating a Simple Service

Let's start by creating a service for a random number generator.

To create a new service, three things are needed:

- A unique identifier at the type level (`Random`).
- An interface describing the possible operations of the service (`RandomShape`).
- A unique identifier at the runtime level (`"MyRandomServiceIdentifier"`).

```twoslash include service
import { Effect, Context } from "effect"

// Define an interface named 'Random' to represent the service
export interface Random {
  readonly _: unique symbol // Unique symbol to ensure type-level uniqueness
}

// Define another interface 'RandomShape' to represent the operations of the 'Random' service
export interface RandomShape {
  readonly next: Effect.Effect<never, never, number>
}

// Create a 'Tag' for the 'Random' service
export const Random = Context.Tag<Random, RandomShape>("MyRandomServiceIdentifier")
```

```ts filename="service.ts" twoslash
// @include: service
```

The `Random` value is what is referred to as a "Tag" in Effect.
It serves as a representation of the `Random` service and allows Effect to locate and use this service at runtime.

Conceptually, we can start building a mental model of the context of an effect by thinking of it as a `Map`:

```ts
Map<Tag, ServiceImpl>
```

Where the Tag acts as the "key" to the service implementation within the context.

## Using the Service

Now that we have our service tag defined, let's see how we can use it by building a pipeline.

<Tabs items={["Using Effect.gen", "Using pipe"]}>
<Tab>

```ts twoslash
// @filename: service.ts
// @include: service

// @filename: index.ts
// ---cut---
import { Effect } from "effect"
import { Random } from "./service"

const program = Effect.gen(function* (_) {
  const random = yield* _(Random)
  const randomNumber = yield* _(random.next)
  console.log(`random number: ${randomNumber}`)
})
```

In the code above, we can observe that we are able to yield the `Random` Tag as if it were an `Effect` itself.
This allows us to access the `next` operation of the service.
We then use the `console.log` utility to log the generated random number.

</Tab>
<Tab>

```ts twoslash
// @filename: service.ts
// @include: service

// @filename: index.ts
// ---cut---
import { Effect, Console } from "effect"
import { Random } from "./service"

const program = Random.pipe(
  Effect.flatMap((random) => random.next),
  Effect.flatMap((randomNumber) =>
    Console.log(`random number: ${randomNumber}`)
  )
)
```

In the code above, we can observe that we are able to flat-map over the `Random` Tag as if it were an Effect itself.
This allows us to access the `next` operation of the service within the `flatMap` callback.
We then use the `Console.log` utility to log the generated random number.

</Tab>
</Tabs>

It's worth noting that the type of the `program` variable includes `Random` in the `R` type parameter:

```ts
Effect<Random, never, void>
```

This indicates that our program requires the `Random` service to be provided in order to execute successfully.

If we attempt to execute the effect without providing the necessary service we will encounter a type-checking error:

```ts twoslash
// @errors: 2345
// @include: service

const program = Effect.gen(function* (_) {
  const random = yield* _(Random)
  const randomNumber = yield* _(random.next)
  console.log(`random number: ${randomNumber}`)
})

// ---cut---
Effect.runSync(program)
```

To resolve this error and successfully execute the program, we need to provide an actual implementation of the `Random` service.

In the next section, we will explore how to implement and provide the `Random` service to our program, enabling us to run it successfully.

## Providing a Service implementation

In order to provide an actual implementation of the `Random` service, we can utilize the `Effect.provideService` function.

```ts twoslash
// @include: service

const program = Effect.gen(function* (_) {
  const random = yield* _(Random)
  const randomNumber = yield* _(random.next)
  console.log(`random number: ${randomNumber}`)
})

// ---cut---
const runnable = Effect.provideService(program, Random, {
  next: Effect.sync(() => Math.random())
})

Effect.runPromise(runnable)
/*
Output:
random number: 0.8241872233134417
*/
```

In the code snippet above, we call the `program` that we defined earlier and provide it with an implementation of the `Random` service.
We use the `Effect.provideService(effect, tag, implementation){:ts}` function to associate the `Random` tag with its implementation, an object with a `next` operation that generates a random number.

Notice that the `R` type parameter of the `runnable` effect is now `never`. This indicates that the effect no longer requires any context to be provided. With the implementation of the `Random` service in place, we are able to run the program without any further dependencies.

By calling `Effect.runPromise(runnable){:ts}`, the program is executed, and the resulting output can be observed on the console.

## Inferring the Shape

A commonly used pattern to simplify the process of defining a tag involves inferring the shape of the service from the implementation constructor. Here's an example:

```ts twoslash
import { Effect, Context } from "effect"

interface Random {
  readonly _: unique symbol
}

const randomImpl = {
  next: Effect.sync(() => Math.random())
}

const Random = Context.Tag<Random, typeof randomImpl>(
  "MyRandomServiceIdentifier"
)

const program = Effect.gen(function* (_) {
  const random = yield* _(Random)
  const randomNumber = yield* _(random.next)
  console.log(`random number: ${randomNumber}`)
})

const runnable = Effect.provideService(program, Random, randomImpl)
```

As you can see, the shape of the `Random` service is inferred from the implementation (`typeof randomImpl`), reducing the burden of explicitly defining it.

## Using Multiple Services

When we require the usage of more than one service, the process remains similar to what we've learned in defining a service, repeated for each service needed. Let's examine an example where we need two services, namely `Random` and `Logger`:

<Tabs items={["Using Effect.gen", "Using pipe"]}>
<Tab>

```twoslash include random-logger
import { Effect, Context } from "effect"

interface Random {
  readonly _: unique symbol
}

interface RandomShape {
  readonly next: Effect.Effect<never, never, number>
}

// Create a 'Tag' for the 'Random' service
const Random = Context.Tag<Random, RandomShape>("MyRandomServiceIdentifier")

interface Logger {
  readonly _: unique symbol
}

interface LoggerShape {
  readonly log: (message: string) => Effect.Effect<never, never, void>
}

// Create a 'Tag' for the 'Logger' service
const Logger = Context.Tag<Logger, LoggerShape>("MyLoggerServiceIdentifier")
```

```ts twoslash
// @include: random-logger

const program = Effect.gen(function* (_) {
  // Acquire instances of the 'Random' and 'Logger' services
  const random = yield* _(Random)
  const logger = yield* _(Logger)

  // Generate a random number using the 'Random' service
  const randomNumber = yield* _(random.next)

  // Log the random number using the 'Logger' service
  return yield* _(logger.log(String(randomNumber)))
})
```

</Tab>
<Tab>

```ts twoslash
// @include: random-logger

const program =
  // Acquire instances of the 'Random' and 'Logger' services
  Effect.all([Random, Logger]).pipe(
    Effect.flatMap(([random, logger]) =>
      // Generate a random number using the 'Random' service
      random.next.pipe(
        Effect.flatMap((randomNumber) =>
          // Log the random number using the 'Logger' service
          logger.log(String(randomNumber))
        )
      )
    )
  )
```

</Tab>
</Tabs>

In the code above, we define two service interfaces: `RandomShape` and `LoggerShape`. Each interface represents a different service with its own set of operations.

The `program` effect now has an `R` type parameter of `Random | Logger`, indicating that it requires both the `Random` and `Logger` services to be provided.

```ts
Effect<Random | Logger, never, void>
```

To execute the `program`, we need to provide implementations for both services:

```ts twoslash
// @include: random-logger

const program = Effect.gen(function* (_) {
  const random = yield* _(Random)
  const logger = yield* _(Logger)
  const randomNumber = yield* _(random.next)
  return yield* _(logger.log(String(randomNumber)))
})

// ---cut---
import { Console } from "effect"

// Provide service implementations for 'Random' and 'Logger'
const runnable1 = program.pipe(
  Effect.provideService(Random, {
    next: Effect.sync(() => Math.random())
  }),
  Effect.provideService(Logger, {
    log: Console.log
  })
)
```

Alternatively, instead of calling `provideService` multiple times, we can combine the service implementations into a single `Context` and then provide the entire context using the `Effect.provide` function:

```ts twoslash
// @include: random-logger

const program = Effect.gen(function* (_) {
  const random = yield* _(Random)
  const logger = yield* _(Logger)
  const randomNumber = yield* _(random.next)
  return yield* _(logger.log(String(randomNumber)))
})

// ---cut---
import { Console } from "effect"

// Combine service implementations into a single 'Context'
const context = Context.empty().pipe(
  Context.add(Random, { next: Effect.sync(() => Math.random()) }),
  Context.add(Logger, {
    log: Console.log
  })
)

// Provide the entire context to the 'program'
const runnable2 = Effect.provide(program, context)
```

By providing the necessary implementations for each service, we ensure that the runnable effect can access and utilize both services when it is executed.

## Optional Services

There are situations where we may want to access a service implementation only if it is available.
In such cases, we can use the `Effect.serviceOption(tag){:ts}` function to handle this scenario.

The `serviceOption` function returns an implementation that can is available only if it is actually provided before executing this effect.
To represent this optionality it returns an `Option` of the implementation:

```ts
Effect<never, never, Option<Random>>
```

Let's take a look at an example that demonstrates the usage of optional services:

<Tabs items={["Using Effect.gen", "Using pipe"]}>
<Tab>

To determine what action to take, we can use the `Option.isNone` function provided by the `Option` module. This function allows us to check if the service is available or not by returning `true` when the service is not available.

```ts twoslash
// @filename: service.ts
// @include: service

// @filename: index.ts
// ---cut---
import { Effect, Option } from "effect"
import { Random } from "./service"

const program = Effect.gen(function* (_) {
  const maybeRandom = yield* _(Effect.serviceOption(Random))
  const randomNumber = Option.isNone(maybeRandom)
    ? // the service is not available, return a default value
      -1
    : // the service is available
      yield* _(maybeRandom.value.next)
  console.log(randomNumber)
})
```

</Tab>
<Tab>

To determine if we can use the service, we can use the `Option.match` function provided by the `Option` module. This function allows us to perform different actions based on whether the service is available or not. It takes two callbacks as arguments: one for the case when the service is not available, and another for the case when it is available.

```ts twoslash
// @filename: service.ts
// @include: service

// @filename: index.ts
// ---cut---
import { Effect, Option, Console } from "effect"
import { Random } from "./service"

const program = Effect.serviceOption(Random).pipe(
  Effect.flatMap((maybeRandom) =>
    Option.match(maybeRandom, {
      // the service is not available, return a default value
      onNone: () => Effect.succeed(-1),
      // the service is available
      onSome: (random) => random.next
    })
  ),
  Effect.flatMap((randomNumber) => Console.log(`${randomNumber}`))
)
```

</Tab>
</Tabs>

In the code above, we can observe that the `R` type parameter of the `program` effect is `never`, even though we are working with a service. This allows us to access something from the context only if it is actually provided before executing this effect.

When we run the `program` effect without providing the `Random` service:

```ts
Effect.runPromise(program).then(console.log)
// Output: -1
```

We see that the log message contains `-1`, which is the default value we provided when the service was not available.

However, if we provide the `Random` service implementation:

```ts
Effect.runPromise(
  Effect.provideService(program, Random, {
    next: Effect.sync(() => Math.random())
  })
).then(console.log)
// Output: 0.9957979486841035
```

We can observe that the log message now contains a random number generated by the `next` operation of the `Random` service.

By using the `Effect.serviceOption` function, we can gracefully handle scenarios where a service may or may not be available, providing flexibility in our programs.

In the upcoming section, we will delve into the topic of [Layers](layers). Layers are powerful constructs for creating services and composing them together, enabling us to build complex dependency graphs that can be seamlessly provided to Effects.
