content/src/content/docs/blog/this-week-in-effect/2024/10/18.mdx, before:

---
title: This Week in Effect - 2024-10-18
excerpt: Effect Paris Meetup on Nov 5th. Dillon Mulroy speaking at the San Francisco Effect Meetup on Oct 21st. Technical updates in Effect.
date: 2024-10-18
authors:
  - davide_scognamiglio
  - mirela_prifti
  - michael_arnaldi
tags:
  - This Week In Effect
---

import { YouTube } from "@astro-community/astro-embed-youtube"
import Tweet from "astro-tweet"
import TwitchPlayerNonInteractive from "@/components/TwitchPlayerNonInteractive.astro"

Hi Effecters!

Welcome back to This Week In Effect (**TWIE**) - your weekly update of the latest developments in the Effect community and ecosystem.

Effect is a powerful TypeScript library that helps developers create complex, synchronous, and asynchronous programs. One key feature that sets Effect apart is how it leverages structured concurrency to provide features such as async cancellation and safe resource management, making it easier to build robust, scalable, and efficient programs.

Get started with Effect with our quick-start guide and documentation below:

- [Effect quick-start guide](/docs/quickstart)
- [Effect docs](/docs/introduction)

Recent major updates:

- Effect is API stable with the [Effect 3.0 release](https://effect.website/blog/effect-3.0).
- [Effect 3.9](https://effect.website/blog/effect-3.9) has been released.
- The [Effect community](https://discord.gg/effect-ts) on Discord reached 3680+ members!

## Technology

Here are all the technical changes from this week.

### Effect Core

- [Add option to .releaseLock a ReadableStream on finalization](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3771) (Feature, next-minor)
- [Merge Schema into Effect](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3772) (Feature, next-minor)
- [Schema.equivalence: fix discriminated tuples](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3789) (Bug Fix, next-minor)
- [Porting of #3792](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3793) (Feature, next-minor)

### Effect Platform

- [Remove Scope requirement from NodeHttpServer.makeHandler](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3779) (Improvement)
- [Ensure cors middleware also affects error responses](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3780) (Bug Fix)
- [Fix HttpMiddleware circular import](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3784) (Bug Fix)

### Effect Schema

- [Equivalence: Fixed a bug related to discriminated tuples](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3790) (Bug Fix)
- [Resolve parse error when using pick with union of class schemas](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3792) (Bug Fix)

### Effect Vitest

- [Vitest README: add Logging section](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3795) (Documentation Update)

### General Chores

- [Dx: add watch task to expose all compile errors to vscode, including not open files.](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3722)

## Community highlights

- The [San Francisco Effect Meetup](https://lu.ma/gmk2jzd2) is approaching fast on Oct 21st, and we announced our final speaker: Dillon Mulroy, Software Engineer at [Vercel](https://vercel.com).

  <Tweet id="1845862419840872808" />

- Also, we have a sneak peek of the upcoming Elliot Dauber speech: **Lessons Learning Effect**.

  <Tweet id="1846584639181504788" />

- The 3rd [Effect Paris Meetup](https://www.meetup.com/fr-FR/effect-paris/events/304021172/?eventorigin=group_upcoming_events) is now scheduled on November 5th and will be hosted by [Spiko](https://www.spiko.xyz/). There's still time to submit a proposal if you'd like to give a talk. As a reminder, the meetup will be in French.

  <Tweet id="1846142515583262767" />

- Congrats to Aiden Bai and the [Million](https://million.dev/) team for rewriting their installer with Effect.

  <Tweet id="1845943360194073037" />

- [Sandro Maglione](https://x.com/SandroMaglione) published a quick [guide](https://www.typeonce.dev/snippet/effect-rpc-http-client-complete-example) on how to use effect/rpc to create a server and derive a client from it.

  <Tweet id="1846860321685696715" />

- Dillon Mulroy live-streamed five new episodes about **Building with EffectTS, Svelte 5, and Postgres** on his Twitch channel.

  <TwitchPlayerNonInteractive video="2273151744" />

- You don't want to miss Lucas Barake's latest video explaining how Effect helps developers simplify their codebase.

  <YouTube url="https://www.youtube.com/embed/X_Qgm7AawUc?si=p_GPapueTc8MQ49z" />

- Marcelo Bairros, dives deep into Effect in the following video emphasizing its value for TypeScript developers looking to optimize their workflows, handle errors more effectively, and more.

  <YouTube url="https://www.youtube.com/embed/zLxUxPCq-TQ?si=R8bsonfGZ570ORUJ" />

- Effect is mentioned in a recent video on the Web Dev Simplified YouTube channel, as an advanced library that offers built-in error handling, highlighting its potential for complex applications.
- <YouTube url="https://www.youtube.com/embed/AdmGHwvgaVs?si=lRu677MhEe4nViz1" />

## Effect content updates

- Tim Smart went live on Thursday with a new episode of **Reimagining Contentlayer with Effect**, where he worked on both HttpApi & ContentLayer.

  <Tweet id="1847006201667846186" />

- The second episode of Mattia Manzati's series on **Building a small warehouse app with Effect** aired on Thursday.

  <Tweet id="1846939685974610282" />

- The fifth and the sixth parts of **Reimagining Contentlayer with Effect** have already been published on the Effect YouTube Channel.
  <YouTube url="https://www.youtube.com/embed/5maIh13qhCo?si=wMvPuqhc0WnODa2_" />

---

<YouTube url="https://www.youtube.com/embed/FsK7sJJLJgY?si=KI4GN6Rkc1FqaCV4" />

## Closing notes

That's all for this week. Thank you for being a vital part of our community. Your feedback is highly valued as we fine-tune this format. Feel free to share your thoughts, and we'll do our best to tailor it to the needs of our community.

_Effect Community Team_

Commit message:

fix broken links in blog

content/src/content/docs/blog/this-week-in-effect/2024/10/18.mdx, after:

---
title: This Week in Effect - 2024-10-18
excerpt: Effect Paris Meetup on Nov 5th. Dillon Mulroy speaking at the San Francisco Effect Meetup on Oct 21st. Technical updates in Effect.
date: 2024-10-18
authors:
  - davide_scognamiglio
  - mirela_prifti
  - michael_arnaldi
tags:
  - This Week In Effect
---

import { YouTube } from "@astro-community/astro-embed-youtube"
import Tweet from "astro-tweet"
import TwitchPlayerNonInteractive from "@/components/TwitchPlayerNonInteractive.astro"

Hi Effecters!

Welcome back to This Week In Effect (**TWIE**) - your weekly update of the latest developments in the Effect community and ecosystem.

Effect is a powerful TypeScript library that helps developers create complex, synchronous, and asynchronous programs. One key feature that sets Effect apart is how it leverages structured concurrency to provide features such as async cancellation and safe resource management, making it easier to build robust, scalable, and efficient programs.

To get started, below you’ll find links to our documentation as well as our guide for installing Effect. Enjoy!

- [Effect Documentation](/docs/getting-started/introduction/)
- [Installing Effect](/docs/getting-started/installation/)

Recent major updates:

- Effect is API stable with the [Effect 3.0 release](https://effect.website/blog/effect-3.0).
- [Effect 3.9](https://effect.website/blog/effect-3.9) has been released.
- The [Effect community](https://discord.gg/effect-ts) on Discord reached 3680+ members!

## Technology

Here are all the technical changes from this week.

### Effect Core

- [Add option to .releaseLock a ReadableStream on finalization](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3771) (Feature, next-minor)
- [Merge Schema into Effect](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3772) (Feature, next-minor)
- [Schema.equivalence: fix discriminated tuples](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3789) (Bug Fix, next-minor)
- [Porting of #3792](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3793) (Feature, next-minor)

### Effect Platform

- [Remove Scope requirement from NodeHttpServer.makeHandler](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3779) (Improvement)
- [Ensure cors middleware also affects error responses](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3780) (Bug Fix)
- [Fix HttpMiddleware circular import](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3784) (Bug Fix)

### Effect Schema

- [Equivalence: Fixed a bug related to discriminated tuples](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3790) (Bug Fix)
- [Resolve parse error when using pick with union of class schemas](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3792) (Bug Fix)

### Effect Vitest

- [Vitest README: add Logging section](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3795) (Documentation Update)

### General Chores

- [Dx: add watch task to expose all compile errors to vscode, including not open files.](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3722)

## Community highlights

- The [San Francisco Effect Meetup](https://lu.ma/gmk2jzd2) is approaching fast on Oct 21st, and we announced our final speaker: Dillon Mulroy, Software Engineer at [Vercel](https://vercel.com).

  <Tweet id="1845862419840872808" />

- Also, we have a sneak peek of the upcoming Elliot Dauber speech: **Lessons Learning Effect**.

  <Tweet id="1846584639181504788" />

- The 3rd [Effect Paris Meetup](https://www.meetup.com/fr-FR/effect-paris/events/304021172/?eventorigin=group_upcoming_events) is now scheduled on November 5th and will be hosted by [Spiko](https://www.spiko.xyz/). There's still time to submit a proposal if you'd like to give a talk. As a reminder, the meetup will be in French.

  <Tweet id="1846142515583262767" />

- Congrats to Aiden Bai and the [Million](https://million.dev/) team for rewriting their installer with Effect.

  <Tweet id="1845943360194073037" />

- [Sandro Maglione](https://x.com/SandroMaglione) published a quick [guide](https://www.typeonce.dev/snippet/effect-rpc-http-client-complete-example) on how to use effect/rpc to create a server and derive a client from it.

  <Tweet id="1846860321685696715" />

- Dillon Mulroy live-streamed five new episodes about **Building with EffectTS, Svelte 5, and Postgres** on his Twitch channel.

  <TwitchPlayerNonInteractive video="2273151744" />

- You don't want to miss Lucas Barake's latest video explaining how Effect helps developers simplify their codebase.

  <YouTube
    id="https://www.youtube.com/embed/X_Qgm7AawUc?si=p_GPapueTc8MQ49z"
    title="How Effect Simplifies Your Code - TypeScript"
  />

- Marcelo Bairros, dives deep into Effect in the following video emphasizing its value for TypeScript developers looking to optimize their workflows, handle errors more effectively, and more.

  <YouTube
    id="https://www.youtube.com/embed/zLxUxPCq-TQ?si=R8bsonfGZ570ORUJ"
    title="Exploring TypeScript’s Effect Library | Online Tech Talk"
  />

- Effect is mentioned in a recent video on the Web Dev Simplified YouTube channel, as an advanced library that offers built-in error handling, highlighting its potential for complex applications.

  <YouTube
    id="https://www.youtube.com/embed/AdmGHwvgaVs?si=lRu677MhEe4nViz1"
    title="I'm Ditching Try/Catch for Good!"
  />

## Effect content updates

- Tim Smart went live on Thursday with a new episode of **Reimagining Contentlayer with Effect**, where he worked on both HttpApi & ContentLayer.

  <Tweet id="1847006201667846186" />

- The second episode of Mattia Manzati's series on **Building a small warehouse app with Effect** aired on Thursday.

  <Tweet id="1846939685974610282" />

- The fifth and the sixth parts of **Reimagining Contentlayer with Effect** have already been published on the Effect YouTube Channel.

  <YouTube
    id="https://www.youtube.com/embed/5maIh13qhCo?si=wMvPuqhc0WnODa2_"
    title="Reimagining Contentlayer with Effect (Part 5)"
  />

---

<YouTube
  id="https://www.youtube.com/embed/FsK7sJJLJgY?si=KI4GN6Rkc1FqaCV4"
  title="Reimagining Contentlayer with Effect (Part 6)"
/>

## Closing notes

That's all for this week. Thank you for being a vital part of our community. Your feedback is highly valued as we fine-tune this format. Feel free to share your thoughts, and we'll do our best to tailor it to the needs of our community.

_Effect Community Team_
