content/src/content/docs/blog/this-week-in-effect/2024/10/25.mdx, before:

---
title: This Week in Effect - 2024-10-25
excerpt: Effect 3.10 release. Effect Meetup San Francisco recap.
date: 2024-10-25
authors:
  - davide_scognamiglio
  - mirela_prifti
  - michael_arnaldi
tags:
  - This Week In Effect
---

import { YouTube } from "@astro-community/astro-embed-youtube"
import Tweet from "astro-tweet"

Hi Effecters!

Welcome back to This Week In Effect (**TWIE**) - your weekly update of the latest developments in the Effect community and ecosystem.

Effect is a powerful TypeScript library that helps developers create complex, synchronous, and asynchronous programs. One key feature that sets Effect apart is how it leverages structured concurrency to provide features such as async cancellation and safe resource management, making it easier to build robust, scalable, and efficient programs.

Get started with Effect with our quick-start guide and documentation below:

- [Effect quick-start guide](/docs/quickstart)
- [Effect docs](/docs/introduction)

Recent major updates:

- Effect is API stable with the [Effect 3.0 release](https://effect.website/blog/effect-3.0).
- [Effect 3.10](https://effect.website/blog/effect-3.10) has been released.
- The [Effect community](https://discord.gg/effect-ts) on Discord reached 3690+ members!

## Technology

- [Effect 3.10](https://effect.website/blog/effect-3.10) has been released!
  <Tweet id="1848719287013544194" />

We're excited to announce that with this release, **the effect/schema package has been merged into the Effect core library**. By installing the newest version of Effect, all data validation functionalities previously provided by the Schema package will be available without needing to install any other package.

Here are all the technical changes from this week (note that changes included in the 3.10 release will not be listed)

### Effect Core

- [Fix race condition in Micro tests](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3815) (Bug Fix)
- [Wait for connection in DevTools client with 1s timeout](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3818) (Bug Fix)
- [Simplify Match fail keys types](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3820) (Improvement)
- [Add JSDocs to GlobalValue module](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3827) (Documentation Update)
- [Make MergeRight, MergeLeft and MergeRecord homomorphic](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3825) (Bug Fix)
- [Add more type level tests for Types.MergeRight](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3828) (Enhancement)
- [Ensure undefined JSON values are not coerced to empty string](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3833) (Bug Fix)
- [Add support for Schema.OptionFromUndefinedOr in JSON Schema generation](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3842) (Feature)
- [Config.url constructor](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3834) (Feature, next-minor)

### Effect CLI

- [Fix cli options repeated order](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3773) (Bug Fix)

### Effect Cluster

- [Add sql-clickhouse & clickhouse dialect](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3760) (Feature)

### Effect Experimental

- [Wait for connection in DevTools client with 1s timeout](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3818) (Bug Fix)

### Effect Platform

- [Add HttpServer.layerContext to platform-node/bun](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3802) (Feature)
- [Fix HttpServer.layerContext access before initialization](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3806) (Bug Fix)
- [Ensure HttpMiddleware is only initialized once](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3808) (Bug Fix)
- [Cache OpenApi schema generation](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3814) (Improvement)
- [Add missing bearer format field](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3813) (Bug Fix)
- [OpenApi spec securitySchema keys fix](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3811) (Bug Fix)
- [Allow Request.signal to be missing in .toWebHandler apis](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3816) (Bug Fix)
- [Ensure headers are redacted when inspecting http requests & responses](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3826) (Bug Fix)
- [Ensure parent annotations take precedence over surrogate annotations](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3831) (Bug Fix)
- [Add HttpApiBuilder.handler, for defining a single handler](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3836) (Feature)
- [Eliminate HttpApiEndpoint context in .handle](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3837) (Bug Fix)
- [Add support for Schema.OptionFromUndefinedOr in JSON Schema generation](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3842) (Feature)

### Effect SQL

- [Add sql-clickhouse & clickhouse dialect](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3760) (Feature)

### Effect Typeclass

- [Add getSemigroupUnion, getMonoidUnion and getSemigroupIntersection for Record](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3840) (Feature)
- [Fix since tags](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3844) (Bug Fix)

### Effect Vitest

- [Fix @effect/vitest .prop test](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3803) (Bug Fix)

### General Chores

- [Remove "@effect/schema" leftovers](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3822)

## Community highlights

- We had our second Effect Meetup in San Francisco - big thanks to our speakers and everyone who joined! It’s always a pleasure to see our community come together, and we look forward to reconnecting with you all at future events. Here are some highlights of the event:

  <Tweet id="1848530414425567250" />
  <Tweet id="1848541755152470248" />
  <Tweet id="1848556525079695397" />
  <Tweet id="1848565133582200978" />
  <Tweet id="1848809087305453693" />

- Sandro Maglione published a new resource about developing a [payment TypeScript app](https://www.typeonce.dev/course/paddle-payments-full-stack-typescript-app) with Paddle and Effect:

  <Tweet id="1848770978664309248" />

- Titouan Créac'h wrote the second part of his article about how he [replaced tRPC with Effect/RPC](https://dev.to/titouancreach/part-2-how-i-replaced-trpc-with-effect-rpc-in-a-nextjs-app-router-application-streaming-responses-566c) in a Next.js app router application.

  <Tweet id="1848657349927440454" />

- Chris Tate, developer at Vercel and creator of SpecUI, is working on a new AI assistant, Information Overload, that will allow developers to copy updated docs into the assistant to generate code - and he's been using Effect in his tech stack.

  <Tweet id="1849110385858638206" />

- The 3rd [Effect Paris Meetup](https://www.meetup.com/fr-FR/effect-paris/events/304021172/?eventorigin=group_upcoming_events) is now scheduled on November 5th and will be hosted by [Spiko](https://www.spiko.xyz/). There's still time to submit a proposal if you'd like to give a talk - the meetup will be in French.
  <Tweet id="1846142515583262767" />

## Effect content updates

- A new episode of **Reimagining Contentlayer with Effect** by Tim Smart was aired on Thursday.

  <Tweet id="1849609388409155902" />

- Mattia Manzati went live on Thursday with his series about **Building a small warehouse app with Effect**.

  <Tweet id="1849459357232046394" />

- Part 7 of **Reimagining Contentlayer with Effect** has already been published on the Effect YouTube Channel.
  <YouTube url="https://www.youtube.com/embed/MXhE36Xkpjw?si=R9irA33Xv63pIB4U" />

## Closing notes

That's all for this week. Thank you for being a vital part of our community. Your feedback is highly valued as we fine-tune this format. Feel free to share your thoughts, and we'll do our best to tailor it to the needs of our community.

_Effect Community Team_

Commit message:

fix broken links in blog

content/src/content/docs/blog/this-week-in-effect/2024/10/25.mdx, after:

---
title: This Week in Effect - 2024-10-25
excerpt: Effect 3.10 release. Effect Meetup San Francisco recap.
date: 2024-10-25
authors:
  - davide_scognamiglio
  - mirela_prifti
  - michael_arnaldi
tags:
  - This Week In Effect
---

import { YouTube } from "@astro-community/astro-embed-youtube"
import Tweet from "astro-tweet"

Hi Effecters!

Welcome back to This Week In Effect (**TWIE**) - your weekly update of the latest developments in the Effect community and ecosystem.

Effect is a powerful TypeScript library that helps developers create complex, synchronous, and asynchronous programs. One key feature that sets Effect apart is how it leverages structured concurrency to provide features such as async cancellation and safe resource management, making it easier to build robust, scalable, and efficient programs.

To get started, below you’ll find links to our documentation as well as our guide for installing Effect. Enjoy!

- [Effect Documentation](/docs/getting-started/introduction/)
- [Installing Effect](/docs/getting-started/installation/)

Recent major updates:

- Effect is API stable with the [Effect 3.0 release](https://effect.website/blog/effect-3.0).
- [Effect 3.10](https://effect.website/blog/effect-3.10) has been released.
- The [Effect community](https://discord.gg/effect-ts) on Discord reached 3690+ members!

## Technology

- [Effect 3.10](https://effect.website/blog/effect-3.10) has been released!

  <Tweet id="1848719287013544194" />

We're excited to announce that with this release, **the effect/schema package has been merged into the Effect core library**. By installing the newest version of Effect, all data validation functionalities previously provided by the Schema package will be available without needing to install any other package.

Here are all the technical changes from this week (note that changes included in the 3.10 release will not be listed)

### Effect Core

- [Fix race condition in Micro tests](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3815) (Bug Fix)
- [Wait for connection in DevTools client with 1s timeout](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3818) (Bug Fix)
- [Simplify Match fail keys types](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3820) (Improvement)
- [Add JSDocs to GlobalValue module](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3827) (Documentation Update)
- [Make MergeRight, MergeLeft and MergeRecord homomorphic](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3825) (Bug Fix)
- [Add more type level tests for Types.MergeRight](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3828) (Enhancement)
- [Ensure undefined JSON values are not coerced to empty string](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3833) (Bug Fix)
- [Add support for Schema.OptionFromUndefinedOr in JSON Schema generation](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3842) (Feature)
- [Config.url constructor](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3834) (Feature, next-minor)

### Effect CLI

- [Fix cli options repeated order](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3773) (Bug Fix)

### Effect Cluster

- [Add sql-clickhouse & clickhouse dialect](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3760) (Feature)

### Effect Experimental

- [Wait for connection in DevTools client with 1s timeout](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3818) (Bug Fix)

### Effect Platform

- [Add HttpServer.layerContext to platform-node/bun](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3802) (Feature)
- [Fix HttpServer.layerContext access before initialization](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3806) (Bug Fix)
- [Ensure HttpMiddleware is only initialized once](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3808) (Bug Fix)
- [Cache OpenApi schema generation](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3814) (Improvement)
- [Add missing bearer format field](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3813) (Bug Fix)
- [OpenApi spec securitySchema keys fix](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3811) (Bug Fix)
- [Allow Request.signal to be missing in .toWebHandler apis](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3816) (Bug Fix)
- [Ensure headers are redacted when inspecting http requests & responses](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3826) (Bug Fix)
- [Ensure parent annotations take precedence over surrogate annotations](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3831) (Bug Fix)
- [Add HttpApiBuilder.handler, for defining a single handler](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3836) (Feature)
- [Eliminate HttpApiEndpoint context in .handle](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3837) (Bug Fix)
- [Add support for Schema.OptionFromUndefinedOr in JSON Schema generation](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3842) (Feature)

### Effect SQL

- [Add sql-clickhouse & clickhouse dialect](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3760) (Feature)

### Effect Typeclass

- [Add getSemigroupUnion, getMonoidUnion and getSemigroupIntersection for Record](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3840) (Feature)
- [Fix since tags](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3844) (Bug Fix)

### Effect Vitest

- [Fix @effect/vitest .prop test](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3803) (Bug Fix)

### General Chores

- [Remove "@effect/schema" leftovers](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/3822)

## Community highlights

- We had our second Effect Meetup in San Francisco - big thanks to our speakers and everyone who joined! It’s always a pleasure to see our community come together, and we look forward to reconnecting with you all at future events. Here are some highlights of the event:

  <Tweet id="1848530414425567250" />
  <Tweet id="1848541755152470248" />
  <Tweet id="1848556525079695397" />
  <Tweet id="1848565133582200978" />
  <Tweet id="1848809087305453693" />

- Sandro Maglione published a new resource about developing a [payment TypeScript app](https://www.typeonce.dev/course/paddle-payments-full-stack-typescript-app) with Paddle and Effect:

  <Tweet id="1848770978664309248" />

- Titouan Créac'h wrote the second part of his article about how he [replaced tRPC with Effect/RPC](https://dev.to/titouancreach/part-2-how-i-replaced-trpc-with-effect-rpc-in-a-nextjs-app-router-application-streaming-responses-566c) in a Next.js app router application.

  <Tweet id="1848657349927440454" />

- Chris Tate, developer at Vercel and creator of SpecUI, is working on a new AI assistant, Information Overload, that will allow developers to copy updated docs into the assistant to generate code - and he's been using Effect in his tech stack.

  <Tweet id="1849110385858638206" />

- The 3rd [Effect Paris Meetup](https://www.meetup.com/fr-FR/effect-paris/events/304021172/?eventorigin=group_upcoming_events) is now scheduled on November 5th and will be hosted by [Spiko](https://www.spiko.xyz/). There's still time to submit a proposal if you'd like to give a talk - the meetup will be in French.

  <Tweet id="1846142515583262767" />

## Effect content updates

- A new episode of **Reimagining Contentlayer with Effect** by Tim Smart was aired on Thursday.

  <Tweet id="1849609388409155902" />

- Mattia Manzati went live on Thursday with his series about **Building a small warehouse app with Effect**.

  <Tweet id="1849459357232046394" />

- Part 7 of **Reimagining Contentlayer with Effect** has already been published on the Effect YouTube Channel.

  <YouTube
    id="https://www.youtube.com/embed/MXhE36Xkpjw?si=R9irA33Xv63pIB4U"
    title="Effect Cluster - Design Sync Session (Part 7)"
  />

## Closing notes

That's all for this week. Thank you for being a vital part of our community. Your feedback is highly valued as we fine-tune this format. Feel free to share your thoughts, and we'll do our best to tailor it to the needs of our community.

_Effect Community Team_
