content/docs/400-guides/150-error-management/300-unexpected-errors.mdx, before:

---
title: Unexpected Errors
excerpt: Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet, consetetur sadipscing elitr, sed diam nonumy eirmod tempor invidunt ut labore.
bottomNavigation: pagination
---

There are situations where you may encounter unexpected errors, and you need to decide how to handle them. Effect provides functions to help you deal with such scenarios, allowing you to take appropriate actions when errors occur during the execution of your effects.

## Handling Unrecoverable Errors

When you encounter an unrecoverable error, meaning an error that cannot be handled or anticipated in advance, you can use the following functions to terminate the execution of the effect:

### die / dieMessage

The `Effect.die` function returns an effect that dies a specified error, while `Effect.dieMessage` throws a `RuntimeException` with a specified text message. These functions are useful for terminating a fiber when a defect, a critical and unexpected error, is detected in the code.

Example using `die`:

```ts twoslash
import { Effect } from "effect"

const divide = (a: number, b: number): Effect.Effect<never, never, number> =>
  b === 0
    ? Effect.die(new Error("Cannot divide by zero"))
    : Effect.succeed(a / b)

Effect.runSync(divide(1, 0)) // throws Error: Cannot divide by zero
```

Example using `dieMessage`:

```ts twoslash
import { Effect } from "effect"

const divide = (a: number, b: number): Effect.Effect<never, never, number> =>
  b === 0 ? Effect.dieMessage("Cannot divide by zero") : Effect.succeed(a / b)

Effect.runSync(divide(1, 0)) // throws RuntimeException: Cannot divide by zero
```

### orDie

The `Effect.orDie` function transforms an effect's failure into a termination of the fiber, making all failures unchecked and not part of the type of the effect. It can be used to handle errors that you do not wish to recover from.

```ts twoslash
import { Effect } from "effect"

const divide = (a: number, b: number): Effect.Effect<never, Error, number> =>
  b === 0
    ? Effect.fail(new Error("Cannot divide by zero"))
    : Effect.succeed(a / b)

const program = Effect.orDie(divide(1, 0))

Effect.runSync(program) // throws Error: Cannot divide by zero
```

After using `Effect.orDie`, the error channel type of the `program` is `never`, indicating that all failures are unchecked, and the effect is expected to terminate the fiber when an error occurs.

### orDieWith

Similar to `Effect.orDie`, the `Effect.orDieWith` function transforms an effect's failure into a termination of the fiber using a specified mapping function. It allows you to customize the error message before terminating the fiber.

```ts twoslash
import { Effect } from "effect"

const divide = (a: number, b: number): Effect.Effect<never, Error, number> =>
  b === 0
    ? Effect.fail(new Error("Cannot divide by zero"))
    : Effect.succeed(a / b)

const program = Effect.orDieWith(
  divide(1, 0),
  (error) => new Error(`defect: ${error.message}`)
)

Effect.runSync(program) // throws Error: defect: Cannot divide by zero
```

After using `Effect.orDieWith`, the error channel type of the `program` is `never`, just like with `Effect.orDie`.

## Catching

Effect provides two functions that allow you to handle unexpected errors that may occur during the execution of your effects.

<Warning>
  There is no sensible way to recover from defects. The functions we're about to
  discuss should be used only at the boundary between Effect and an external
  system, to transmit information on a defect for diagnostic or explanatory
  purposes.
</Warning>

### catchAllDefect

The `Effect.catchAllDefect` function allows you to recover from all defects using a provided function. Here's an example:

```ts twoslash
import { Effect, Cause, Console } from "effect"

const program = Effect.catchAllDefect(
  Effect.dieMessage("Boom!"), // Simulating a runtime error
  (defect) => {
    if (Cause.isRuntimeException(defect)) {
      return Console.log(`RuntimeException defect caught: ${defect.message}`)
    }
    return Console.log("Unknown defect caught.")
  }
)

// We get an Exit.Success because we caught all defects
Effect.runPromiseExit(program).then(console.log)
/*
Output:
RuntimeException defect caught: Boom!
{
  _id: "Exit",
  _tag: "Success",
  value: undefined
}
*/
```

It's important to understand that `catchAllDefect` can only handle defects, not expected errors (such as those caused by `Effect.fail`) or interruptions in execution (such as when using `Effect.interrupt`).

A defect refers to an error that cannot be anticipated in advance, and there is no reliable way to respond to it. As a general rule, it's recommended to let defects crash the application, as they often indicate serious issues that need to be addressed.

However, in some specific cases, such as when dealing with dynamically loaded plugins, a controlled recovery approach might be necessary. For example, if our application supports runtime loading of plugins and a defect occurs within a plugin, we may choose to log the defect and then reload only the affected plugin instead of crashing the entire application. This allows for a more resilient and uninterrupted operation of the application.

### catchSomeDefect

The `Effect.catchSomeDefect` function in Effect allows you to recover from specific defects using a provided partial function. Let's take a look at an example:

```ts twoslash
import { Effect, Cause, Option, Console } from "effect"

const program = Effect.catchSomeDefect(
  Effect.dieMessage("Boom!"), // Simulating a runtime error
  (defect) => {
    if (Cause.isIllegalArgumentException(defect)) {
      return Option.some(
        Console.log(
          `Caught an IllegalArgumentException defect: ${defect.message}`
        )
      )
    }
    return Option.none()
  }
)

// Since we are only catching IllegalArgumentException
// we will get an Exit.Failure because we simulated a runtime error.
Effect.runPromiseExit(program).then(console.log)
/*
Output:
{
  _id: "Exit",
  _tag: "Failure",
  cause: {
    _id: "Cause",
    _tag: "Die",
    defect: {
      _tag: "RuntimeException",
      message: "Boom!",
      [Symbol(@effect/io/Cause/errors/RuntimeException)]: Symbol(@effect/io/Cause/errors/RuntimeException),
      toString: [Function: toString]
    }
  }
}
*/
```

It's important to understand that `catchSomeDefect` can only handle defects, not [expected errors](expected-errors) (such as those caused by `Effect.fail`) or [interruptions](../concurrency/interruption-model) in execution (such as when using `Effect.interrupt`).

Commit message:

replace excerpt placeholders with actual content (index pages excluded)

content/docs/400-guides/150-error-management/300-unexpected-errors.mdx, after:

---
title: Unexpected Errors
excerpt: Learn how Effect handles unrecoverable errors, such as defects, providing functions like `die`, `dieMessage`, `orDie`, and `orDieWith`. Explore techniques to terminate effect execution, handle unexpected errors, and recover from defects. Discover the use of `catchAllDefect` and `catchSomeDefect` to manage and selectively recover from specific defects.
bottomNavigation: pagination
---

There are situations where you may encounter unexpected errors, and you need to decide how to handle them. Effect provides functions to help you deal with such scenarios, allowing you to take appropriate actions when errors occur during the execution of your effects.

## Handling Unrecoverable Errors

When you encounter an unrecoverable error, meaning an error that cannot be handled or anticipated in advance, you can use the following functions to terminate the execution of the effect:

### die / dieMessage

The `Effect.die` function returns an effect that dies a specified error, while `Effect.dieMessage` throws a `RuntimeException` with a specified text message. These functions are useful for terminating a fiber when a defect, a critical and unexpected error, is detected in the code.

Example using `die`:

```ts twoslash
import { Effect } from "effect"

const divide = (a: number, b: number): Effect.Effect<never, never, number> =>
  b === 0
    ? Effect.die(new Error("Cannot divide by zero"))
    : Effect.succeed(a / b)

Effect.runSync(divide(1, 0)) // throws Error: Cannot divide by zero
```

Example using `dieMessage`:

```ts twoslash
import { Effect } from "effect"

const divide = (a: number, b: number): Effect.Effect<never, never, number> =>
  b === 0 ? Effect.dieMessage("Cannot divide by zero") : Effect.succeed(a / b)

Effect.runSync(divide(1, 0)) // throws RuntimeException: Cannot divide by zero
```

### orDie

The `Effect.orDie` function transforms an effect's failure into a termination of the fiber, making all failures unchecked and not part of the type of the effect. It can be used to handle errors that you do not wish to recover from.

```ts twoslash
import { Effect } from "effect"

const divide = (a: number, b: number): Effect.Effect<never, Error, number> =>
  b === 0
    ? Effect.fail(new Error("Cannot divide by zero"))
    : Effect.succeed(a / b)

const program = Effect.orDie(divide(1, 0))

Effect.runSync(program) // throws Error: Cannot divide by zero
```

After using `Effect.orDie`, the error channel type of the `program` is `never`, indicating that all failures are unchecked, and the effect is expected to terminate the fiber when an error occurs.

### orDieWith

Similar to `Effect.orDie`, the `Effect.orDieWith` function transforms an effect's failure into a termination of the fiber using a specified mapping function. It allows you to customize the error message before terminating the fiber.

```ts twoslash
import { Effect } from "effect"

const divide = (a: number, b: number): Effect.Effect<never, Error, number> =>
  b === 0
    ? Effect.fail(new Error("Cannot divide by zero"))
    : Effect.succeed(a / b)

const program = Effect.orDieWith(
  divide(1, 0),
  (error) => new Error(`defect: ${error.message}`)
)

Effect.runSync(program) // throws Error: defect: Cannot divide by zero
```

After using `Effect.orDieWith`, the error channel type of the `program` is `never`, just like with `Effect.orDie`.

## Catching

Effect provides two functions that allow you to handle unexpected errors that may occur during the execution of your effects.

<Warning>
  There is no sensible way to recover from defects. The functions we're about
  to discuss should be used only at the boundary between Effect and an
  external system, to transmit information on a defect for diagnostic or
  explanatory purposes.
</Warning>

### catchAllDefect

The `Effect.catchAllDefect` function allows you to recover from all defects using a provided function. Here's an example:

```ts twoslash
import { Effect, Cause, Console } from "effect"

const program = Effect.catchAllDefect(
  Effect.dieMessage("Boom!"), // Simulating a runtime error
  (defect) => {
    if (Cause.isRuntimeException(defect)) {
      return Console.log(`RuntimeException defect caught: ${defect.message}`)
    }
    return Console.log("Unknown defect caught.")
  }
)

// We get an Exit.Success because we caught all defects
Effect.runPromiseExit(program).then(console.log)
/*
Output:
RuntimeException defect caught: Boom!
{
  _id: "Exit",
  _tag: "Success",
  value: undefined
}
*/
```

It's important to understand that `catchAllDefect` can only handle defects, not expected errors (such as those caused by `Effect.fail`) or interruptions in execution (such as when using `Effect.interrupt`).

A defect refers to an error that cannot be anticipated in advance, and there is no reliable way to respond to it. As a general rule, it's recommended to let defects crash the application, as they often indicate serious issues that need to be addressed.

However, in some specific cases, such as when dealing with dynamically loaded plugins, a controlled recovery approach might be necessary. For example, if our application supports runtime loading of plugins and a defect occurs within a plugin, we may choose to log the defect and then reload only the affected plugin instead of crashing the entire application. This allows for a more resilient and uninterrupted operation of the application.

### catchSomeDefect

The `Effect.catchSomeDefect` function in Effect allows you to recover from specific defects using a provided partial function. Let's take a look at an example:

```ts twoslash
import { Effect, Cause, Option, Console } from "effect"

const program = Effect.catchSomeDefect(
  Effect.dieMessage("Boom!"), // Simulating a runtime error
  (defect) => {
    if (Cause.isIllegalArgumentException(defect)) {
      return Option.some(
        Console.log(
          `Caught an IllegalArgumentException defect: ${defect.message}`
        )
      )
    }
    return Option.none()
  }
)

// Since we are only catching IllegalArgumentException
// we will get an Exit.Failure because we simulated a runtime error.
Effect.runPromiseExit(program).then(console.log)
/*
Output:
{
  _id: "Exit",
  _tag: "Failure",
  cause: {
    _id: "Cause",
    _tag: "Die",
    defect: {
      _tag: "RuntimeException",
      message: "Boom!",
      [Symbol(@effect/io/Cause/errors/RuntimeException)]: Symbol(@effect/io/Cause/errors/RuntimeException),
      toString: [Function: toString]
    }
  }
}
*/
```

It's important to understand that `catchSomeDefect` can only handle defects, not [expected errors](expected-errors) (such as those caused by `Effect.fail`) or [interruptions](../concurrency/interruption-model) in execution (such as when using `Effect.interrupt`).
