content/docs/400-guides/150-error-management/700-timing-out.mdx, before:

---
title: Timing out
excerpt: Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet, consetetur sadipscing elitr, sed diam nonumy eirmod tempor invidunt ut labore.
bottomNavigation: pagination
---

In the world of programming, we often deal with tasks that take some time to complete. Sometimes, we want to set a limit on how long we are willing to wait for a task to finish. This is where the `Effect.timeout` function comes into play. It allows us to put a time constraint on an operation, ensuring that it doesn't run indefinitely. In this guide, we'll explore how to use `Effect.timeout` effectively.

## timeout

Effect lets us timeout any effect using the `Effect.timeout` function, which returns a new effect that succeeds with an [`Option`](../../other/data-types/option):

- A `None` indicates that the timeout elapsed before the effect could complete its execution.
- A `Some` indicates that the effect completed before the timeout elapsed, and the `Some` contains the result of the effect.

If an effect times out, then instead of continuing to execute in the background, it will be interrupted so no resources will be wasted.

Suppose we have the following effect:

```ts twoslash
import { Effect } from "effect"

const program = Effect.gen(function* (_) {
  console.log("start doing something...")
  yield* _(Effect.sleep("2 seconds"))
  console.log("my job is finished!")
  return "some result"
})

const main = program.pipe(Effect.timeout("3 seconds"))
```

When we apply `Effect.timeout` to `program`, it behaves in one of the following ways:

1. If the original effect (`program` in this case) completes before the timeout elapses, it returns `Some` of the produced value by the original effect. Here's an example:

   ```ts twoslash
   import { Effect } from "effect"

   const program = Effect.gen(function* (_) {
     console.log("start doing something...")
     yield* _(Effect.sleep("2 seconds"))
     console.log("my job is finished!")
     return "some result"
   })

   const main = program.pipe(Effect.timeout("3 seconds"))

   Effect.runPromise(main).then(console.log)
   /*
   Output:
   start doing something...
   my job is finished!
   {
   _id: "Option",
   _tag: "Some",
   value: "some result"
   }
   */
   ```

2. If the timeout elapses before the original effect completes, and the effect is interruptible, it will be immediately interrupted, and the timeout operation produces a `None` value. Here's an example:

   ```ts twoslash
   import { Effect } from "effect"

   const program = Effect.gen(function* (_) {
     console.log("start doing something...")
     yield* _(Effect.sleep("2 seconds"))
     console.log("my job is finished!")
     return "some result"
   })

   const main = program.pipe(Effect.timeout("1 seconds"))

   Effect.runPromise(main).then(console.log)
   /*
   Output:
   start doing something...
   {
   _id: "Option",
   _tag: "None"
   }
   */
   ```

3. If the effect is uninterruptible, it will be blocked until the original effect safely finishes its work, and then the timeout operator produces a `None` value. Here's an example:

   ```ts twoslash
   import { Effect } from "effect"

   const program = Effect.gen(function* (_) {
     console.log("start doing something...")
     yield* _(Effect.sleep("2 seconds"))
     console.log("my job is finished!")
     return "some result"
   })

   const main = program.pipe(
     Effect.uninterruptible,
     Effect.timeout("1 seconds")
   )

   Effect.runPromise(main).then(console.log)
   /*
   Output:
   start doing something...
   my job is finished!
   {
   _id: "Option",
   _tag: "None"
   }
   */
   ```

   If we want to return early after the timeout has passed and before an underlying effect has been interrupted, we can use `Effect.disconnect`. This technique allows the original effect to be interrupted in the background. Here's an example:

   ```ts twoslash
   import { Effect } from "effect"

   const program = Effect.gen(function* (_) {
     console.log("start doing something...")
     yield* _(Effect.sleep("2 seconds"))
     console.log("my job is finished!")
     return "some result"
   })

   const main = program.pipe(
     Effect.uninterruptible,
     Effect.disconnect,
     Effect.timeout("1 seconds")
   )

   Effect.runPromise(main).then(console.log)
   /*
   Output:
   start doing something...
   {
   _id: "Option",
   _tag: "None"
   }
   my job is finished!
   */
   ```

## Customizing Timeout Behavior

In addition to the basic `Effect.timeout` function, there are variations available that allow you to customize the behavior when a timeout occurs.

### timeoutTo

The `timeoutTo` function is similar to `Effect.timeout`, but it provides more control over the final result type. It allows you to specify what should be returned in case of a timeout. Here's an example:

```ts twoslash
import { Effect, Either } from "effect"

const program = Effect.gen(function* (_) {
  console.log("start doing something...")
  yield* _(Effect.sleep("2 seconds"))
  console.log("my job is finished!")
  return "some result"
})

const main = program.pipe(
  Effect.timeoutTo({
    duration: "1 seconds",
    // let's return an Either instead of an Option
    onSuccess: (result): Either.Either<string, string> => Either.right(result),
    onTimeout: (): Either.Either<string, string> => Either.left("timeout!")
  })
)

Effect.runPromise(main).then(console.log)
/*
Output:
start doing something...
{
  _id: "Either",
  _tag: "Left",
  left: "timeout!"
}
*/
```

### timeoutFail

The `timeoutFail` function allows you to produce a specific error when a timeout happens. This can be helpful for signaling timeout errors in your code. Here's an example:

```ts twoslash
import { Effect } from "effect"

const program = Effect.gen(function* (_) {
  console.log("start doing something...")
  yield* _(Effect.sleep("2 seconds"))
  console.log("my job is finished!")
  return "some result"
})

const main = program.pipe(
  Effect.timeoutFail({
    duration: "1 seconds",
    onTimeout: () => new Error("timeout")
  })
)

Effect.runPromise(main).then(console.log)
/*
Output:
start doing something...
Error: timeout
*/
```

### timeoutFailCause

The `timeoutFailCause` function allows you to produce a specific defect when a timeout occurs. This is useful when you need to handle timeouts as exceptional cases in your code. Here's an example:

```ts twoslash
import { Effect, Cause } from "effect"

const program = Effect.gen(function* (_) {
  console.log("start doing something...")
  yield* _(Effect.sleep("2 seconds"))
  console.log("my job is finished!")
  return "some result"
})

const main = program.pipe(
  Effect.timeoutFailCause({
    duration: "1 seconds",
    onTimeout: () => Cause.die("timeout")
  })
)

Effect.runPromise(main).then(console.log, console.error)
/*
Output:
start doing something...
{
  _id: "FiberFailure",
  cause: {
    _id: "Cause",
    _tag: "Die",
    defect: "timeout"
  }
}
*/
```

Commit message:

replace excerpt placeholders with actual content (index pages excluded) (#424)

content/docs/400-guides/150-error-management/700-timing-out.mdx, after:

---
title: Timing out
excerpt: Learn how to set time constraints on operations with `Effect.timeout`. Discover how to handle scenarios where tasks need to complete within a specified timeframe. Explore variations like `timeoutTo`, `timeoutFail`, and `timeoutFailCause` to customize behavior when a timeout occurs, providing more control and flexibility in managing time-sensitive operations.
bottomNavigation: pagination
---

In the world of programming, we often deal with tasks that take some time to complete. Sometimes, we want to set a limit on how long we are willing to wait for a task to finish. This is where the `Effect.timeout` function comes into play. It allows us to put a time constraint on an operation, ensuring that it doesn't run indefinitely. In this guide, we'll explore how to use `Effect.timeout` effectively.

## timeout

Effect lets us timeout any effect using the `Effect.timeout` function, which returns a new effect that succeeds with an [`Option`](../../other/data-types/option):

- A `None` indicates that the timeout elapsed before the effect could complete its execution.
- A `Some` indicates that the effect completed before the timeout elapsed, and the `Some` contains the result of the effect.

If an effect times out, then instead of continuing to execute in the background, it will be interrupted so no resources will be wasted.

Suppose we have the following effect:

```ts twoslash
import { Effect } from "effect"

const program = Effect.gen(function* (_) {
  console.log("start doing something...")
  yield* _(Effect.sleep("2 seconds"))
  console.log("my job is finished!")
  return "some result"
})

const main = program.pipe(Effect.timeout("3 seconds"))
```

When we apply `Effect.timeout` to `program`, it behaves in one of the following ways:

1. If the original effect (`program` in this case) completes before the timeout elapses, it returns `Some` of the produced value by the original effect. Here's an example:

   ```ts twoslash
   import { Effect } from "effect"

   const program = Effect.gen(function* (_) {
     console.log("start doing something...")
     yield* _(Effect.sleep("2 seconds"))
     console.log("my job is finished!")
     return "some result"
   })

   const main = program.pipe(Effect.timeout("3 seconds"))

   Effect.runPromise(main).then(console.log)
   /*
   Output:
   start doing something...
   my job is finished!
   {
   _id: "Option",
   _tag: "Some",
   value: "some result"
   }
   */
   ```

2. If the timeout elapses before the original effect completes, and the effect is interruptible, it will be immediately interrupted, and the timeout operation produces a `None` value. Here's an example:

   ```ts twoslash
   import { Effect } from "effect"

   const program = Effect.gen(function* (_) {
     console.log("start doing something...")
     yield* _(Effect.sleep("2 seconds"))
     console.log("my job is finished!")
     return "some result"
   })

   const main = program.pipe(Effect.timeout("1 seconds"))

   Effect.runPromise(main).then(console.log)
   /*
   Output:
   start doing something...
   {
   _id: "Option",
   _tag: "None"
   }
   */
   ```

3. If the effect is uninterruptible, it will be blocked until the original effect safely finishes its work, and then the timeout operator produces a `None` value. Here's an example:

   ```ts twoslash
   import { Effect } from "effect"

   const program = Effect.gen(function* (_) {
     console.log("start doing something...")
     yield* _(Effect.sleep("2 seconds"))
     console.log("my job is finished!")
     return "some result"
   })

   const main = program.pipe(
     Effect.uninterruptible,
     Effect.timeout("1 seconds")
   )

   Effect.runPromise(main).then(console.log)
   /*
   Output:
   start doing something...
   my job is finished!
   {
   _id: "Option",
   _tag: "None"
   }
   */
   ```

   If we want to return early after the timeout has passed and before an underlying effect has been interrupted, we can use `Effect.disconnect`. This technique allows the original effect to be interrupted in the background. Here's an example:

   ```ts twoslash
   import { Effect } from "effect"

   const program = Effect.gen(function* (_) {
     console.log("start doing something...")
     yield* _(Effect.sleep("2 seconds"))
     console.log("my job is finished!")
     return "some result"
   })

   const main = program.pipe(
     Effect.uninterruptible,
     Effect.disconnect,
     Effect.timeout("1 seconds")
   )

   Effect.runPromise(main).then(console.log)
   /*
   Output:
   start doing something...
   {
   _id: "Option",
   _tag: "None"
   }
   my job is finished!
   */
   ```

## Customizing Timeout Behavior

In addition to the basic `Effect.timeout` function, there are variations available that allow you to customize the behavior when a timeout occurs.

### timeoutTo

The `timeoutTo` function is similar to `Effect.timeout`, but it provides more control over the final result type. It allows you to specify what should be returned in case of a timeout. Here's an example:

```ts twoslash
import { Effect, Either } from "effect"

const program = Effect.gen(function* (_) {
  console.log("start doing something...")
  yield* _(Effect.sleep("2 seconds"))
  console.log("my job is finished!")
  return "some result"
})

const main = program.pipe(
  Effect.timeoutTo({
    duration: "1 seconds",
    // let's return an Either instead of an Option
    onSuccess: (result): Either.Either<string, string> =>
      Either.right(result),
    onTimeout: (): Either.Either<string, string> => Either.left("timeout!")
  })
)

Effect.runPromise(main).then(console.log)
/*
Output:
start doing something...
{
  _id: "Either",
  _tag: "Left",
  left: "timeout!"
}
*/
```

### timeoutFail

The `timeoutFail` function allows you to produce a specific error when a timeout happens. This can be helpful for signaling timeout errors in your code. Here's an example:

```ts twoslash
import { Effect } from "effect"

const program = Effect.gen(function* (_) {
  console.log("start doing something...")
  yield* _(Effect.sleep("2 seconds"))
  console.log("my job is finished!")
  return "some result"
})

const main = program.pipe(
  Effect.timeoutFail({
    duration: "1 seconds",
    onTimeout: () => new Error("timeout")
  })
)

Effect.runPromise(main).then(console.log)
/*
Output:
start doing something...
Error: timeout
*/
```

### timeoutFailCause

The `timeoutFailCause` function allows you to produce a specific defect when a timeout occurs. This is useful when you need to handle timeouts as exceptional cases in your code. Here's an example:

```ts twoslash
import { Effect, Cause } from "effect"

const program = Effect.gen(function* (_) {
  console.log("start doing something...")
  yield* _(Effect.sleep("2 seconds"))
  console.log("my job is finished!")
  return "some result"
})

const main = program.pipe(
  Effect.timeoutFailCause({
    duration: "1 seconds",
    onTimeout: () => Cause.die("timeout")
  })
)

Effect.runPromise(main).then(console.log, console.error)
/*
Output:
start doing something...
{
  _id: "FiberFailure",
  cause: {
    _id: "Cause",
    _tag: "Die",
    defect: "timeout"
  }
}
*/
```
