content/src/content/docs/blog/this-week-in-effect/2025/10/03.mdx, before:

---
pagefind: false
title: This Week in Effect - 2025-10-03
excerpt: Effect 3.18 release. Documentation search layer update. Effect Office Hours Episode 2. ChEffect and Twitch – Spotify Integration development coding sessions.
date: 2025-10-03
authors:
  - davide_scognamiglio
  - mirela_prifti
  - michael_arnaldi
tags:
  - This Week In Effect
---

import { YouTube } from "@astro-community/astro-embed-youtube"
import Tweet from "astro-tweet"
import TwitchPlayerNonInteractive from "@/components/TwitchPlayerNonInteractive.astro"

Hi Effecters!

Welcome back to This Week In Effect (**TWIE**) - your weekly update of the latest developments in the Effect community and ecosystem.

Effect is a powerful TypeScript library that helps developers create complex, synchronous, and asynchronous programs. One key feature that sets Effect apart is how it leverages structured concurrency to provide features such as async cancellation and safe resource management, making it easier to build robust, scalable, and efficient programs.

To get started, below you’ll find links to our documentation as well as our guide for installing Effect. Enjoy!

- [Effect Documentation](/docs/getting-started/introduction/)
- [Installing Effect](/docs/getting-started/installation/)


**Recent major updates:**

- [Effect 3.18](https://effect.website/blog/releases/effect/318) Release.
- [Effect AI SDK](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/releases/tag/%40effect%2Fai%400.27.0) Release.
- Durable workflows in TypeScript with [`@effect/workflow`](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/blob/main/packages/workflow/README.md) - currently in alpha.
- The [Effect community](https://discord.gg/effect-ts) on Discord reached 5380+ members!
- Effect crossed [11K Stars on GitHub](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect) 🌟.

&nbsp;
## Technology

[Effect 3.18](https://effect.website/blog/releases/effect/318) has been released!
  <Tweet id="1972941582065348946" />

We’ve updated the search layer of our documentation with [Mixedbread](https://www.mixedbread.com/) to deliver a smoother search experience, boosting the quality of results even for advanced topics.
  <Tweet id="1973462131040452626" />

Here are all the technical changes from the past week (note that changes included in the 3.18 release will not be listed).

### Effect Core
- [Enable console.group in Logger.prettyLogger when using Bun](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/5584) (Bug Fix)

### Effect AI
- [Filter to response status 200 in AI client stream requests](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/5571) (Bug Fix)
- [Fix response schema when tool call resolution is disabled](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/5587) (Bug Fix)

### Effect Cluster
- [Fix SqlMessageStorage last reply for sqlite](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/5575) (Bug Fix)
- [Ignore non-client interrupts in workflow activities](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/5577) (Bug Fix)
- [Persist activity interrupts as "Suspended"](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/5581) (Bug Fix)
- [Keep socket error listener attached in NodeSocket](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/5585) (Bug Fix)
- [Add openTimeout options to NodeSocket.makeNet](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/5590) (Feature)

### Effect Platform
- [Keep socket error listener attached in NodeSocket](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/5585) (Bug Fix)
- [Add openTimeout options to NodeSocket.makeNet](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/5590) (Feature)
- [Add additional predicate typings for HttpMiddleware.cors allowOrigins](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/5588) (Feature)

### Effect RPC
- [Ignore non-client interrupts in workflow activities](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/5577) (Bug Fix)
- [Persist activity interrupts as "Suspended"](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/5581) (Bug Fix)

### Effect Workflow
- [Fix SqlMessageStorage last reply for sqlite](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/5575) (Bug Fix)
- [Ignore non-client interrupts in workflow activities](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/5577) (Bug Fix)
- [Persist activity interrupts as "Suspended"](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/5581) (Bug Fix)
- [Keep socket error listener attached in NodeSocket](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/5585) (Bug Fix)
- [Add openTimeout options to NodeSocket.makeNet](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/5590) (Feature)


&nbsp;

## Community Highlights

- [Jens Claes](https://github.com/entropitor) built a [TypeScript Terraform Provider SDK](https://github.com/entropitor/terraform-providers) powered by Effect. Check out Jens' [blog](https://entropitor.com/blog/terraform-provider-in-typescript?utm_source=discord&utm_medium=social&utm_campaign=typescript&utm_term=effect-ts&utm_content=showcase) to learn more.

&nbsp;

- [Paul Philp](https://github.com/PaulJPhilp) shipped a major update to both [effect-mdx](https://github.com/PaulJPhilp/effect-mdx), a type-safe, functional library for processing MDX content, and [The Effect Patterns Hub](https://github.com/PaulJPhilp/EffectPatterns), a community-driven knowledge base for Effect, now covering 42 new patterns.

&nbsp;
## Effect Content Update

 - The second episode of **Effect Office Hours** aired on Wednesday! Our host, Kit Langton, was joined by Maxwell Brown and Michael Arnaldi to answer some questions from the community.
   <Tweet id="1973465926474539428" />

&nbsp;

**PART 3: Developing a Twitch – Spotify Integration** and **ChEffect - Part 5: A Local-First App built w/ Effect & LiveStore** are now on our YouTube Channel.

<YouTube
  id="https://www.youtube.com/embed/OTJ8YnbxR-U?si=WKP4wHtkMOD4Per2"
  title="PART 3: Developing a Twitch – Spotify Integration"
/>

&nbsp;

<YouTube
  id="https://www.youtube.com/embed/Y6KyNhroG7g?si=P8MzWpKzesrka4P4"
  title="ChEffect - Part 5: A Local-First App built w/ Effect & LiveStore"
/>
&nbsp;

## Cause & Effect Podcast

Don't forget to listen to our **Cause & Effect** podcast hosted by Johannes Schickling and available on [YouTube](https://www.youtube.com/@effect-ts), [X(Twitter)](https://x.com/EffectTS_/status/1967543931031126523), and audio platforms like [Spotify](https://open.spotify.com/episode/5vhRg2zUt7UxP7ABof8XQ0) and [Apple Podcast](https://podcasts.apple.com/us/podcast/event-driven-systems-in-fintech-how-spiko-leverages/id1781879869?i=1000726884416).

This podcast highlights stories from software engineers and companies using Effect in production. Each episode explores their journey of adopting Effect, including the learning process, challenges faced, and benefits of integrating Effect into their tech stack.

We've published our fifth episode with Samuel Briole, CTO of [Spiko](https://www.spiko.io/), a Paris-based FinTech startup building infrastructure for issuing regulated financial products on public blockchains, specifically risk-free products. 

Spiko utilizes Effect extensively, from day one, for both backend and frontend development, particularly for managing asynchronous operations, API integrations, and smart contracts.

<YouTube
  id="https://www.youtube.com/embed/lFOHVZnJLew?si=LjNt7r29zM0j8T1s"
  title="Event-Driven Systems in FinTech: How Spiko Leverages Effect | Samuel Briole | Cause & Effect #5"
/>

&nbsp;
## Effect Job Opportunities

More and more companies are adopting Effect in their projects. Here’s a list of companies looking for software engineers with Effect experience:

- **Expand.ai**: [Founding Engineer](https://www.expand.ai/careers/founding-engineer)

- **Platonic Systems**: [Remote Effect Engineers](https://twitter.com/platonicsystems/status/1861470819861311945)

- **Inato**: [Product Engineers / Fullstack Engineers](https://jobs.lever.co/inato/6df2d1e3-ce0a-487b-a930-840759803d44)

- **Medbill.ai**: [Founding Software Engineers (full-stack and backend)](https://www.linkedin.com/posts/codingtom_medbill-ai-activity-7260092522708762624-N7TH)

- **Oneiro Solutions**: Software Engineer - Core Team. [Join Effect Discord](https://discord.com/channels/795981131316985866/796153351372275743) and DM *leighman* for further info.

- **Microsub**: [TS Developer](https://x.com/0xdownshift/status/1880013835878154510)

- **Samsung Food**: [Full Stack Developer](https://whisk.bamboohr.com/careers/110)

- **Margins**: [Product Engineer](https://margins.app/jobs/product-engineer)

- **[Precurion](https://precurion.com/)** looking for a remote‑first Founding Engineer with Effect experience – See the job posting in the `#job-board` channel on [our Discord](https://discord.com/channels/795981131316985866/796153351372275743/1362610725931061258).

- **Vitalize Care** is hiring a full-stack engineer with Effect experience: [Full-Stack Engineer](https://jobs.ashbyhq.com/vitalize/d907ba5f-0f2f-4bb4-931a-1680d6daf81a)

- **Embedded Insurance** is hiring for a [Senior Software Engineering](https://embeddedinsurance.bamboohr.com/careers/23) position.

- **Betalyra**, an AI consulting company from Portugal, is looking for a part-time freelance software engineer (TypeScript/Effect) with AI experience – see the job posting in the `#job-board` channel on [our Discord](https://discord.com/channels/795981131316985866/796153351372275743/1362610725931061258).

- **Software Intelligence Works**: [Senior Full-Stack Engineer](https://remotive.com/remote-jobs/software-dev/senior-full-stack-engineer-2011648)

- **14.ai**: [Founding engineer](https://14.ai/careers)

- **Wander** is hiring [Software Developers](https://ship.wander.com) with experience in Effect.

- **Glide**: [Senior Frontend Product Engineer](https://www.glideapps.com/jobs/frontend-product-engineer)

- **Stealth team** looking for a software engineer with Effect experience – see the job posting in the `#job-board` channel on [our Discord](https://discord.com/channels/795981131316985866/796153351372275743/1362610725931061258).

- **A French-speaking** startup team led by Stephan Le Dorze is looking for a freelancer to join them - [see his LinkedIn post](https://www.linkedin.com/posts/stephaneledorze_mission-longue-avec-moi-entre-autre-activity-7310947252741570560-Bqsh/) for more details.

- **Freckle.io** is hiring [Platform Engineers](https://x.com/code_typist/status/1930326662677434561) with experience in Effect.

- **A stealth team** that has already scaled their product to 50K daily active users in the last year, is looking for [Effect Developers](https://x.com/wireless_dev/status/1930314012723687739). DM [wireless](https://x.com/wireless_dev) on X for more info.

- Job opening for [Japanese-speaking developers](https://note.com/luma/n/n679d4dcdb363)

- **VST**: [Senior Full Stack Software Engineer](https://www.linkedin.com/jobs/view/3854111540/)

- **Globe Commerce**: [Founding Product Engineer](https://www.linkedin.com/jobs/view/4264203054)

- **Introw**: [Staff Software Engineer](https://join.com/companies/introw/14395111-staff-software-engineer)

- **Gale**: [SWE Intern - Remote (CAN/US)](https://forms.galevisa.com/r/m6gr7e)

- **Heartbeat**: [Senior Software Engineer](https://jobs.heartbeat.chat/35182) 

- **Superwall**: [Full-stack Mobile Developer](https://x.com/jakemor/status/1972770955500876070)

- **spring.new**, Anthropic's flagship customer, is hiring engineers experienced in Effect. See the job posting in the `#job-board` channel on [our Discord](https://discord.com/channels/795981131316985866/796153351372275743/1405134163287343196).

- **ManageSpace** is looking for a Senior Developer to mentor other developers and migrate to Effect – see the job posting in the `#job-board` channel on [our Discord](https://discord.com/channels/795981131316985866/796153351372275743/1389557459949060098).

- **coteach.ai** is looking for a Software Engineer – see the job posting in the `#job-board` channel on [our Discord](https://discord.com/channels/795981131316985866/796153351372275743/1394724166309253290) and DM *Peter Edmonds* for further info.

- **Small SaaS team** is looking for a part-time Effect Developer to implement Effect in their stack. The job posting is available in the `#job-board` channel on [our Discord](https://discord.com/channels/795981131316985866/796153351372275743/1397684638834491412), DM *jonpage* for further info.

- **PhosPhor** is [hiring engineers](https://phosphor.co/) experienced in Effect. You may also reach out to the Phosphor team on [our Discord](https://discord.com/channels/795981131316985866/796153351372275743/1418407399139578067).

- **Warp** is hiring a [Product Engineer](https://www.joinwarp.com/careers/roles?ashby_jid=655962db-5fbe-40cc-a072-9522295b3cbc)

_Disclaimer: Please note that these job postings are shared for informational purposes, and we encourage applicants to verify details directly with the hiring companies._


&nbsp;
## Effect Merch Store

The [Effect Merch Store](https://effect.website/merch) offers a selection of Effect-branded items designed for the community. All orders are processed and fully managed through [Printful](https://www.printful.com/).

<Tweet id="1868605126862385238" />


&nbsp;
## Closing Notes

That's all for this week. Thank you for being a vital part of our community. Your feedback is highly valued as we fine-tune this format. Feel free to share your thoughts, and we'll do our best to tailor it to the needs of our community.

_Effect Community Team_

Commit message:

Revise blog post for clarity and updates
Updated the excerpt and community highlights to reflect recent changes. Improved clarity and detail in the content.

content/src/content/docs/blog/this-week-in-effect/2025/10/03.mdx, after:

---
pagefind: false
title: This Week in Effect - 2025-10-03
excerpt: Effect 3.18 release. Effect Docs search powered by Mixedbread. Effect Office Hours 2. ChEffect & Twitch – Spotify Integration coding sessions.
date: 2025-10-03
authors:
  - davide_scognamiglio
  - mirela_prifti
  - michael_arnaldi
tags:
  - This Week In Effect
---

import { YouTube } from "@astro-community/astro-embed-youtube"
import Tweet from "astro-tweet"
import TwitchPlayerNonInteractive from "@/components/TwitchPlayerNonInteractive.astro"

Hi Effecters!

Welcome back to This Week In Effect (**TWIE**) - your weekly update of the latest developments in the Effect community and ecosystem.

Effect is a powerful TypeScript library that helps developers create complex, synchronous, and asynchronous programs. One key feature that sets Effect apart is how it leverages structured concurrency to provide features such as async cancellation and safe resource management, making it easier to build robust, scalable, and efficient programs.

To get started, below you’ll find links to our documentation as well as our guide for installing Effect. Enjoy!

- [Effect Documentation](/docs/getting-started/introduction/)
- [Installing Effect](/docs/getting-started/installation/)


**Recent major updates:**

- [Effect 3.18](https://effect.website/blog/releases/effect/318) Release.
- [Effect AI SDK](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/releases/tag/%40effect%2Fai%400.27.0) Release.
- Durable workflows in TypeScript with [`@effect/workflow`](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/blob/main/packages/workflow/README.md) - currently in alpha.
- The [Effect community](https://discord.gg/effect-ts) on Discord reached 5390+ members!

&nbsp;
## Technology

[Effect 3.18](https://effect.website/blog/releases/effect/318) has been released!
  <Tweet id="1972941582065348946" />

Here are all the technical changes from the past week (note that changes included in the 3.18 release will not be listed).

### Effect Core
- [Enable console.group in Logger.prettyLogger when using Bun](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/5584) (Bug Fix)

### Effect AI
- [Filter to response status 200 in AI client stream requests](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/5571) (Bug Fix)
- [Fix response schema when tool call resolution is disabled](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/5587) (Bug Fix)

### Effect Cluster
- [Fix SqlMessageStorage last reply for sqlite](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/5575) (Bug Fix)
- [Ignore non-client interrupts in workflow activities](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/5577) (Bug Fix)
- [Persist activity interrupts as "Suspended"](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/5581) (Bug Fix)
- [Keep socket error listener attached in NodeSocket](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/5585) (Bug Fix)
- [Add openTimeout options to NodeSocket.makeNet](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/5590) (Feature)

### Effect Platform
- [Keep socket error listener attached in NodeSocket](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/5585) (Bug Fix)
- [Add openTimeout options to NodeSocket.makeNet](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/5590) (Feature)
- [Add additional predicate typings for HttpMiddleware.cors allowOrigins](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/5588) (Feature)

### Effect RPC
- [Ignore non-client interrupts in workflow activities](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/5577) (Bug Fix)
- [Persist activity interrupts as "Suspended"](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/5581) (Bug Fix)

### Effect Workflow
- [Fix SqlMessageStorage last reply for sqlite](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/5575) (Bug Fix)
- [Ignore non-client interrupts in workflow activities](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/5577) (Bug Fix)
- [Persist activity interrupts as "Suspended"](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/5581) (Bug Fix)
- [Keep socket error listener attached in NodeSocket](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/5585) (Bug Fix)
- [Add openTimeout options to NodeSocket.makeNet](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/5590) (Feature)


&nbsp;

## Community Highlights

- [TypeScript Terraform Provider SDK](https://github.com/entropitor/terraform-providers) powered by Effect, by [Jens Claes](https://github.com/entropitor). Learn more in this [blog post](https://entropitor.com/blog/terraform-provider-in-typescript).

&nbsp;

- [effect-mdx](https://github.com/PaulJPhilp/effect-mdx) v0.2.0 release – a type-safe MDX processing with Effect. Project by [Paul Philp](https://github.com/PaulJPhilp).

- [Mixedbread Search](https://www.mixedbread.com/) opened up their beta, and we’ve been using it to power Effect Docs, making the search experience faster, smarter, and more relevant.
  <Tweet id="1973462131040452626" />


&nbsp;
## Effect Content Update

 - The second episode of **Effect Office Hours** aired on Wednesday! We will publish an edited version on our YouTube channel soon. In the meantime, you can watch the livestream on X(Twitter) below.
   <Tweet id="1973465926474539428" />

&nbsp;

**PART 3: Developing a Twitch – Spotify Integration** and **ChEffect - Part 5: A Local-First App built w/ Effect & LiveStore** are now on our YouTube Channel.

<YouTube
  id="https://www.youtube.com/embed/OTJ8YnbxR-U?si=WKP4wHtkMOD4Per2"
  title="PART 3: Developing a Twitch – Spotify Integration"
/>

&nbsp;

<YouTube
  id="https://www.youtube.com/embed/Y6KyNhroG7g?si=P8MzWpKzesrka4P4"
  title="ChEffect - Part 5: A Local-First App built w/ Effect & LiveStore"
/>
&nbsp;

## Cause & Effect Podcast

Don't forget to listen to our **Cause & Effect** podcast hosted by Johannes Schickling and available on [YouTube](https://www.youtube.com/@effect-ts), [X(Twitter)](https://x.com/EffectTS_/status/1967543931031126523), and audio platforms like [Spotify](https://open.spotify.com/episode/5vhRg2zUt7UxP7ABof8XQ0) and [Apple Podcast](https://podcasts.apple.com/us/podcast/event-driven-systems-in-fintech-how-spiko-leverages/id1781879869?i=1000726884416).

This podcast highlights stories from software engineers and companies using Effect in production. Each episode explores their journey of adopting Effect, including the learning process, challenges faced, and benefits of integrating Effect into their tech stack.

We've published our fifth episode with Samuel Briole, CTO of [Spiko](https://www.spiko.io/), a Paris-based FinTech startup building infrastructure for issuing regulated financial products on public blockchains, specifically risk-free products. 

Spiko utilizes Effect extensively, from day one, for both backend and frontend development, particularly for managing asynchronous operations, API integrations, and smart contracts.

<YouTube
  id="https://www.youtube.com/embed/lFOHVZnJLew?si=LjNt7r29zM0j8T1s"
  title="Event-Driven Systems in FinTech: How Spiko Leverages Effect | Samuel Briole | Cause & Effect #5"
/>

&nbsp;
## Effect Job Opportunities

More and more companies are adopting Effect in their projects. Here’s a list of companies looking for software engineers with Effect experience:

- **Expand.ai**: [Founding Engineer](https://www.expand.ai/careers/founding-engineer)

- **Platonic Systems**: [Remote Effect Engineers](https://twitter.com/platonicsystems/status/1861470819861311945)

- **Inato**: [Product Engineers / Fullstack Engineers](https://jobs.lever.co/inato/6df2d1e3-ce0a-487b-a930-840759803d44)

- **Medbill.ai**: [Founding Software Engineers (full-stack and backend)](https://www.linkedin.com/posts/codingtom_medbill-ai-activity-7260092522708762624-N7TH)

- **Oneiro Solutions**: Software Engineer - Core Team. [Join Effect Discord](https://discord.com/channels/795981131316985866/796153351372275743) and DM *leighman* for further info.

- **Microsub**: [TS Developer](https://x.com/0xdownshift/status/1880013835878154510)

- **Samsung Food**: [Full Stack Developer](https://whisk.bamboohr.com/careers/110)

- **Margins**: [Product Engineer](https://margins.app/jobs/product-engineer)

- **[Precurion](https://precurion.com/)** looking for a remote‑first Founding Engineer with Effect experience – See the job posting in the `#job-board` channel on [our Discord](https://discord.com/channels/795981131316985866/796153351372275743/1362610725931061258).

- **Vitalize Care** is hiring a full-stack engineer with Effect experience: [Full-Stack Engineer](https://jobs.ashbyhq.com/vitalize/d907ba5f-0f2f-4bb4-931a-1680d6daf81a)

- **Embedded Insurance** is hiring for a [Senior Software Engineering](https://embeddedinsurance.bamboohr.com/careers/23) position.

- **Betalyra**, an AI consulting company from Portugal, is looking for a part-time freelance software engineer (TypeScript/Effect) with AI experience – see the job posting in the `#job-board` channel on [our Discord](https://discord.com/channels/795981131316985866/796153351372275743/1362610725931061258).

- **Software Intelligence Works**: [Senior Full-Stack Engineer](https://remotive.com/remote-jobs/software-dev/senior-full-stack-engineer-2011648)

- **14.ai**: [Founding engineer](https://14.ai/careers)

- **Wander** is hiring [Software Developers](https://ship.wander.com) with experience in Effect.

- **Glide**: [Senior Frontend Product Engineer](https://www.glideapps.com/jobs/frontend-product-engineer)

- **Stealth team** looking for a software engineer with Effect experience – see the job posting in the `#job-board` channel on [our Discord](https://discord.com/channels/795981131316985866/796153351372275743/1362610725931061258).

- **A French-speaking** startup team led by Stephan Le Dorze is looking for a freelancer to join them - [see his LinkedIn post](https://www.linkedin.com/posts/stephaneledorze_mission-longue-avec-moi-entre-autre-activity-7310947252741570560-Bqsh/) for more details.

- **Freckle.io** is hiring [Platform Engineers](https://x.com/code_typist/status/1930326662677434561) with experience in Effect.

- **A stealth team** that has already scaled their product to 50K daily active users in the last year, is looking for [Effect Developers](https://x.com/wireless_dev/status/1930314012723687739). DM [wireless](https://x.com/wireless_dev) on X for more info.

- Job opening for [Japanese-speaking developers](https://note.com/luma/n/n679d4dcdb363)

- **VST**: [Senior Full Stack Software Engineer](https://www.linkedin.com/jobs/view/3854111540/)

- **Globe Commerce**: [Founding Product Engineer](https://www.linkedin.com/jobs/view/4264203054)

- **Introw**: [Staff Software Engineer](https://join.com/companies/introw/14395111-staff-software-engineer)

- **Gale**: [SWE Intern - Remote (CAN/US)](https://forms.galevisa.com/r/m6gr7e)

- **Heartbeat**: [Senior Software Engineer](https://jobs.heartbeat.chat/35182) 

- **Superwall**: [Full-stack Mobile Developer](https://x.com/jakemor/status/1972770955500876070)

- **spring.new**, Anthropic's flagship customer, is hiring engineers experienced in Effect. See the job posting in the `#job-board` channel on [our Discord](https://discord.com/channels/795981131316985866/796153351372275743/1405134163287343196).

- **ManageSpace** is looking for a Senior Developer to mentor other developers and migrate to Effect – see the job posting in the `#job-board` channel on [our Discord](https://discord.com/channels/795981131316985866/796153351372275743/1389557459949060098).

- **coteach.ai** is looking for a Software Engineer – see the job posting in the `#job-board` channel on [our Discord](https://discord.com/channels/795981131316985866/796153351372275743/1394724166309253290) and DM *Peter Edmonds* for further info.

- **Small SaaS team** is looking for a part-time Effect Developer to implement Effect in their stack. The job posting is available in the `#job-board` channel on [our Discord](https://discord.com/channels/795981131316985866/796153351372275743/1397684638834491412), DM *jonpage* for further info.

- **PhosPhor** is [hiring engineers](https://phosphor.co/) experienced in Effect. You may also reach out to the Phosphor team on [our Discord](https://discord.com/channels/795981131316985866/796153351372275743/1418407399139578067).

- **Warp** is hiring a [Product Engineer](https://www.joinwarp.com/careers/roles?ashby_jid=655962db-5fbe-40cc-a072-9522295b3cbc)

_Disclaimer: Please note that these job postings are shared for informational purposes, and we encourage applicants to verify details directly with the hiring companies._


&nbsp;
## Effect Merch Store

The [Effect Merch Store](https://effect.website/merch) offers a selection of Effect-branded items designed for the community. All orders are processed and fully managed through [Printful](https://www.printful.com/).

<Tweet id="1868605126862385238" />


&nbsp;
## Closing Notes

That's all for this week. Thank you for being a vital part of our community. Your feedback is highly valued as we fine-tune this format. Feel free to share your thoughts, and we'll do our best to tailor it to the needs of our community.

_Effect Community Team_
