content/docs/400-guides/660-streaming/200-sink/100-introduction.mdx, before:

---
title: Introduction to Sinks
excerpt: Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet, consetetur sadipscing elitr, sed diam nonumy eirmod tempor invidunt ut labore.
---

In the world of streams, a `Sink<R, E, In, L, Z>` plays a crucial role. It's like a specialized function designed to consume elements generated by a `Stream`. Here's a breakdown of what a `Sink` does:

- It can consume a varying number of `In` elements, which might be zero, one, or more.
- It has the potential to encounter errors of type `E`.
- Ultimately, it produces a value of type `Z`.
- Additionally, it can return a remainder of type `L`, which represents any leftover elements.

To use a `Sink` for processing a stream, you simply pass it to the `Stream.run` function:

```ts twoslash
import { Stream, Sink, Effect } from "effect"

const stream = Stream.make(1, 2, 3) // Define a stream with numbers 1, 2, and 3

const sink = Sink.sum // Choose a sink that sums up numbers

const sum = Stream.run(stream, sink) // Run the stream through the sink

Effect.runPromise(sum).then(console.log)
/*
Output:
6
*/
```

Commit message:

replace excerpt placeholders with actual content (index pages excluded)

content/docs/400-guides/660-streaming/200-sink/100-introduction.mdx, after:

---
title: Introduction to Sinks
excerpt: Explore the role of `Sink<R, E, In, L, Z>` in stream processing. Learn how a `Sink` consumes elements, handles errors, produces values, and manages leftover elements. Use it seamlessly with `Stream.run` for efficient stream processing.
bottomNavigation: pagination
---

In the world of streams, a `Sink<R, E, In, L, Z>` plays a crucial role. It's like a specialized function designed to consume elements generated by a `Stream`. Here's a breakdown of what a `Sink` does:

- It can consume a varying number of `In` elements, which might be zero, one, or more.
- It has the potential to encounter errors of type `E`.
- Ultimately, it produces a value of type `Z`.
- Additionally, it can return a remainder of type `L`, which represents any leftover elements.

To use a `Sink` for processing a stream, you simply pass it to the `Stream.run` function:

```ts twoslash
import { Stream, Sink, Effect } from "effect"

const stream = Stream.make(1, 2, 3) // Define a stream with numbers 1, 2, and 3

const sink = Sink.sum // Choose a sink that sums up numbers

const sum = Stream.run(stream, sink) // Run the stream through the sink

Effect.runPromise(sum).then(console.log)
/*
Output:
6
*/
```
