content/docs/400-guides/660-streaming/200-sink/200-creating.mdx, before:

---
title: Creating Sinks
excerpt: Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet, consetetur sadipscing elitr, sed diam nonumy eirmod tempor invidunt ut labore.
---

In the world of streams, sinks are used to consume and process the elements of a stream. Here, we will introduce some common sink constructors that allow you to create sinks for specific tasks.

## Common Constructors

### head

The `head` sink creates a sink that captures the first element of a stream. If the stream is empty, it returns `None`.

```ts twoslash
import { Stream, Sink, Effect } from "effect"

const effect = Stream.make(1, 2, 3, 4).pipe(Stream.run(Sink.head()))

Effect.runPromise(effect).then(console.log)
/*
Output:
{
  _id: "Option",
  _tag: "Some",
  value: 1
}
*/
```

### last

The `last` sink consumes all elements of a stream and returns the last element of the stream.

```ts twoslash
import { Stream, Sink, Effect } from "effect"

const effect = Stream.make(1, 2, 3, 4).pipe(Stream.run(Sink.last()))

Effect.runPromise(effect).then(console.log)
/*
Output:
{
  _id: "Option",
  _tag: "Some",
  value: 4
}
*/
```

### count

The `count` sink consumes all elements of the stream and counts the number of elements fed to it.

```ts twoslash
import { Stream, Sink, Effect } from "effect"

const effect = Stream.make(1, 2, 3, 4).pipe(Stream.run(Sink.count))

Effect.runPromise(effect).then(console.log)
/*
Output:
4
*/
```

### sum

The `sum` sink consumes all elements of the stream and sums incoming numeric values.

```ts twoslash
import { Stream, Sink, Effect } from "effect"

const effect = Stream.make(1, 2, 3, 4).pipe(Stream.run(Sink.sum))

Effect.runPromise(effect).then(console.log)
/*
Output:
10
*/
```

### take

The `take` sink takes the specified number of values from the stream and results in a [`Chunk`](../../data-types/chunk.mdx) data type.

```ts twoslash
import { Stream, Sink, Effect } from "effect"

const effect = Stream.make(1, 2, 3, 4).pipe(Stream.run(Sink.take(3)))

Effect.runPromise(effect).then(console.log)
/*
Output:
{
  _id: "Chunk",
  values: [ 1, 2, 3 ]
}
*/
```

### drain

The `drain` sink ignores its inputs, effectively discarding them.

```ts twoslash
import { Stream, Sink, Effect } from "effect"

const effect = Stream.make(1, 2, 3, 4).pipe(Stream.run(Sink.drain))

Effect.runPromise(effect).then(console.log)
/*
Output:
undefined
*/
```

### timed

The `timed` sink executes the stream and measures its execution time, providing the duration.

```ts twoslash
import { Stream, Schedule, Sink, Effect } from "effect"

const effect = Stream.make(1, 2, 3, 4).pipe(
  Stream.schedule(Schedule.spaced("100 millis")),
  Stream.run(Sink.timed)
)

Effect.runPromise(effect).then(console.log)
/*
Output:
{
  _id: "Duration",
  _tag: "Millis",
  millis: 523
}
*/
```

### forEach

The `forEach` sink executes the provided effectful function for every element fed to it.

```ts twoslash
import { Stream, Sink, Console, Effect } from "effect"

const effect = Stream.make(1, 2, 3, 4).pipe(
  Stream.run(Sink.forEach(Console.log))
)

Effect.runPromise(effect).then(console.log)
/*
Output:
1
2
3
4
undefined
*/
```

## From Success and Failure

In the realm of data streams, similar to crafting streams to hold and manipulate data, we can also create sinks using the `Sink.fail` and `Sink.succeed` functions.

### Succeeding Sink

Let's start with a sink that doesn't consume any elements from its upstream but instead succeeds with a numeric value:

```ts twoslash
import { Stream, Sink, Effect } from "effect"

const effect = Stream.make(1, 2, 3, 4).pipe(Stream.run(Sink.succeed(0)))

Effect.runPromise(effect).then(console.log)
/*
Output:
0
*/
```

### Failing Sink

Now, consider a sink that also doesn't consume any elements from its upstream but deliberately fails, generating an error message of type `string`:

```ts twoslash
import { Stream, Sink, Effect } from "effect"

const effect = Stream.make(1, 2, 3, 4).pipe(Stream.run(Sink.fail("fail!")))

Effect.runPromise(effect).then(console.log, console.error)
/*
Output:
{
  _id: "FiberFailure",
  cause: {
    _id: "Cause",
    _tag: "Fail",
    failure: "fail!"
  }
}
*/
```

## Collecting

### Collecting All Elements

To gather all the elements from a data stream into a [`Chunk`](../../data-types/chunk.mdx), you can employ the `Sink.collectAll()` function:

```ts twoslash
import { Stream, Sink, Effect } from "effect"

const effect = Stream.make(1, 2, 3, 4).pipe(Stream.run(Sink.collectAll()))

Effect.runPromise(effect).then(console.log)
/*
Output:
{
  _id: "Chunk",
  values: [ 1, 2, 3, 4 ]
}
*/
```

### Collecting into a HashSet

If you want to accumulate the elements into a `HashSet`, you can use `Sink.collectAllToSet()`. This function ensures that each element appears only once in the resulting set:

```ts twoslash
import { Stream, Sink, Effect } from "effect"

const effect = Stream.make(1, 2, 2, 3, 4, 4).pipe(
  Stream.run(Sink.collectAllToSet())
)

Effect.runPromise(effect).then(console.log)
/*
Output:
{
  _id: "HashSet",
  values: [ 1, 2, 3, 4 ]
}
*/
```

### Collecting into a HashMap

For more advanced collection needs, you can use `Sink.collectAllToMap()`. This function allows you to accumulate and merge elements into a `HashMap<K, A>` using a specified merge function. In the following example, we determine map keys with `(n) => n % 3` and merge elements with the same key using `(a, b) => a + b`:

```ts twoslash
import { Stream, Sink, Effect } from "effect"

const effect = Stream.make(1, 3, 2, 3, 1, 5, 1).pipe(
  Stream.run(
    Sink.collectAllToMap(
      (n) => n % 3,
      (a, b) => a + b
    )
  )
)

Effect.runPromise(effect).then(console.log)
/*
Output:
{
  _id: "HashMap",
  values: [
    [ 0, 6 ], [ 1, 3 ], [ 2, 7 ]
  ]
}
*/
```

### Collecting a Specified Number

If you only want to collect a specific number of elements from a stream into a [`Chunk`](../../data-types/chunk.mdx), you can use `Sink.collectAllN(n)`:

```ts twoslash
import { Stream, Sink, Effect } from "effect"

const effect = Stream.make(1, 2, 3, 4, 5).pipe(
  Stream.run(Sink.collectAllN(3))
)

Effect.runPromise(effect).then(console.log)
/*
Output:
{
  _id: "Chunk",
  values: [ 1, 2, 3 ]
}
*/
```

### Collecting While Meeting a Condition

To accumulate elements as long as they satisfy a specific condition, you can use `Sink.collectAllWhile(predicate)`. This function will keep gathering elements until the predicate returns `false`:

```ts twoslash
import { Stream, Sink, Effect } from "effect"

const effect = Stream.make(1, 2, 0, 4, 0, 6, 7).pipe(
  Stream.run(Sink.collectAllWhile((n) => n !== 0))
)

Effect.runPromise(effect).then(console.log)
/*
Output:
{
  _id: "Chunk",
  values: [ 1, 2 ]
}
*/
```

### Collecting into HashSets of a Specific Size

For more controlled collection into sets with a maximum size of `n`, you can utilize `Sink.collectAllToSetN(n)`:

```ts twoslash
import { Stream, Sink, Effect } from "effect"

const effect = Stream.make(1, 2, 2, 3, 4, 4).pipe(
  Stream.run(Sink.collectAllToSetN(3))
)

Effect.runPromise(effect).then(console.log)
/*
Output:
{
  _id: "HashSet",
  values: [ 1, 2, 3 ]
}
*/
```

### Collecting into HashMaps with Limited Keys

If you need to accumulate elements into maps with a maximum of `n` keys, you can employ `Sink.collectAllToMapN(n, keyFunction, mergeFunction)`:

```ts twoslash
import { Stream, Sink, Effect } from "effect"

const effect = Stream.make(1, 3, 2, 3, 1, 5, 1).pipe(
  Stream.run(
    Sink.collectAllToMapN(
      3,
      (n) => n,
      (a, b) => a + b
    )
  )
)

Effect.runPromise(effect).then(console.log)
/*
Output:
{
  _id: "HashMap",
  values: [
    [ 1, 2 ], [ 2, 2 ], [ 3, 6 ]
  ]
}
*/
```

## Folding

### Folding Left

Imagine you have a stream of numbers, and you want to reduce them into a single value by applying an operation to each element sequentially. You can achieve this using the `Sink.foldLeft` function:

```ts twoslash
import { Stream, Sink, Effect } from "effect"

const effect = Stream.make(1, 2, 3, 4).pipe(
  Stream.run(Sink.foldLeft(0, (a, b) => a + b))
)

Effect.runPromise(effect).then(console.log)
/*
Output:
10
*/
```

### Folding with Termination

In some cases, you may want to fold elements in a stream but stop the folding process when a certain condition is met. This is called "short-circuiting." You can achieve this using the `Sink.fold` function, which allows you to specify a termination predicate:

```ts twoslash
import { Stream, Sink, Effect } from "effect"

const effect = Stream.iterate(0, (n) => n + 1).pipe(
  Stream.run(
    Sink.fold(
      0,
      (sum) => sum <= 10,
      (a, b) => a + b
    )
  )
)

Effect.runPromise(effect).then(console.log)
/*
Output:
15
*/
```

### Folding with Weighted Elements

Sometimes, you may want to fold elements based on their weight or cost, accumulating them until a certain maximum cost is reached. You can do this using `Sink.foldWeighted`. In the following example, we group elements based on a weight of 1, restarting the folding process when the total weight reaches 3:

```ts twoslash
import { Stream, Sink, Chunk, Effect } from "effect"

const stream = Stream.make(3, 2, 4, 1, 5, 6, 2, 1, 3, 5, 6).pipe(
  Stream.transduce(
    Sink.foldWeighted({
      initial: Chunk.empty<number>(),
      maxCost: 3,
      cost: () => 1,
      body: (acc, el) => Chunk.append(acc, el)
    })
  )
)

Effect.runPromise(Stream.runCollect(stream)).then(console.log)
/*
Output:
{
  _id: "Chunk",
  values: [
    {
      _id: "Chunk",
      values: [ 3, 2, 4 ]
    }, {
      _id: "Chunk",
      values: [ 1, 5, 6 ]
    }, {
      _id: "Chunk",
      values: [ 2, 1, 3 ]
    }, {
      _id: "Chunk",
      values: [ 5, 6 ]
    }
  ]
}
*/
```

### Folding Until a Limit

If you want to fold elements up to a specific limit, you can use `Sink.foldUntil`. In the following example, we fold elements until we have accumulated 3 of them:

```ts twoslash
import { Stream, Sink, Effect } from "effect"

const effect = Stream.make(1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10).pipe(
  Stream.run(Sink.foldUntil(0, 3, (a, b) => a + b))
)

Effect.runPromise(effect).then(console.log)
/*
Output:
6
*/
```

Commit message:

replace excerpt placeholders with actual content (index pages excluded)

content/docs/400-guides/660-streaming/200-sink/200-creating.mdx, after:

---
title: Creating Sinks
excerpt: Learn how to construct powerful sinks for processing stream elements. Explore common constructors like `head`, `last`, `count`, `sum`, `take`, `drain`, `timed`, `forEach`, and discover how to create sinks from success and failure. Dive into collecting strategies using `collectAll`, `collectAllToSet`, `collectAllToMap`, `collectAllN`, `collectAllWhile`, `collectAllToSetN`, `collectAllToMapN`, folding techniques with `foldLeft`, `fold`, `foldWeighted`, `foldUntil`, and more.
bottomNavigation: pagination
---

In the world of streams, sinks are used to consume and process the elements of a stream. Here, we will introduce some common sink constructors that allow you to create sinks for specific tasks.

## Common Constructors

### head

The `head` sink creates a sink that captures the first element of a stream. If the stream is empty, it returns `None`.

```ts twoslash
import { Stream, Sink, Effect } from "effect"

const effect = Stream.make(1, 2, 3, 4).pipe(Stream.run(Sink.head()))

Effect.runPromise(effect).then(console.log)
/*
Output:
{
  _id: "Option",
  _tag: "Some",
  value: 1
}
*/
```

### last

The `last` sink consumes all elements of a stream and returns the last element of the stream.

```ts twoslash
import { Stream, Sink, Effect } from "effect"

const effect = Stream.make(1, 2, 3, 4).pipe(Stream.run(Sink.last()))

Effect.runPromise(effect).then(console.log)
/*
Output:
{
  _id: "Option",
  _tag: "Some",
  value: 4
}
*/
```

### count

The `count` sink consumes all elements of the stream and counts the number of elements fed to it.

```ts twoslash
import { Stream, Sink, Effect } from "effect"

const effect = Stream.make(1, 2, 3, 4).pipe(Stream.run(Sink.count))

Effect.runPromise(effect).then(console.log)
/*
Output:
4
*/
```

### sum

The `sum` sink consumes all elements of the stream and sums incoming numeric values.

```ts twoslash
import { Stream, Sink, Effect } from "effect"

const effect = Stream.make(1, 2, 3, 4).pipe(Stream.run(Sink.sum))

Effect.runPromise(effect).then(console.log)
/*
Output:
10
*/
```

### take

The `take` sink takes the specified number of values from the stream and results in a [`Chunk`](../../data-types/chunk.mdx) data type.

```ts twoslash
import { Stream, Sink, Effect } from "effect"

const effect = Stream.make(1, 2, 3, 4).pipe(Stream.run(Sink.take(3)))

Effect.runPromise(effect).then(console.log)
/*
Output:
{
  _id: "Chunk",
  values: [ 1, 2, 3 ]
}
*/
```

### drain

The `drain` sink ignores its inputs, effectively discarding them.

```ts twoslash
import { Stream, Sink, Effect } from "effect"

const effect = Stream.make(1, 2, 3, 4).pipe(Stream.run(Sink.drain))

Effect.runPromise(effect).then(console.log)
/*
Output:
undefined
*/
```

### timed

The `timed` sink executes the stream and measures its execution time, providing the duration.

```ts twoslash
import { Stream, Schedule, Sink, Effect } from "effect"

const effect = Stream.make(1, 2, 3, 4).pipe(
  Stream.schedule(Schedule.spaced("100 millis")),
  Stream.run(Sink.timed)
)

Effect.runPromise(effect).then(console.log)
/*
Output:
{
  _id: "Duration",
  _tag: "Millis",
  millis: 523
}
*/
```

### forEach

The `forEach` sink executes the provided effectful function for every element fed to it.

```ts twoslash
import { Stream, Sink, Console, Effect } from "effect"

const effect = Stream.make(1, 2, 3, 4).pipe(
  Stream.run(Sink.forEach(Console.log))
)

Effect.runPromise(effect).then(console.log)
/*
Output:
1
2
3
4
undefined
*/
```

## From Success and Failure

In the realm of data streams, similar to crafting streams to hold and manipulate data, we can also create sinks using the `Sink.fail` and `Sink.succeed` functions.

### Succeeding Sink

Let's start with a sink that doesn't consume any elements from its upstream but instead succeeds with a numeric value:

```ts twoslash
import { Stream, Sink, Effect } from "effect"

const effect = Stream.make(1, 2, 3, 4).pipe(Stream.run(Sink.succeed(0)))

Effect.runPromise(effect).then(console.log)
/*
Output:
0
*/
```

### Failing Sink

Now, consider a sink that also doesn't consume any elements from its upstream but deliberately fails, generating an error message of type `string`:

```ts twoslash
import { Stream, Sink, Effect } from "effect"

const effect = Stream.make(1, 2, 3, 4).pipe(Stream.run(Sink.fail("fail!")))

Effect.runPromise(effect).then(console.log, console.error)
/*
Output:
{
  _id: "FiberFailure",
  cause: {
    _id: "Cause",
    _tag: "Fail",
    failure: "fail!"
  }
}
*/
```

## Collecting

### Collecting All Elements

To gather all the elements from a data stream into a [`Chunk`](../../data-types/chunk.mdx), you can employ the `Sink.collectAll()` function:

```ts twoslash
import { Stream, Sink, Effect } from "effect"

const effect = Stream.make(1, 2, 3, 4).pipe(Stream.run(Sink.collectAll()))

Effect.runPromise(effect).then(console.log)
/*
Output:
{
  _id: "Chunk",
  values: [ 1, 2, 3, 4 ]
}
*/
```

### Collecting into a HashSet

If you want to accumulate the elements into a `HashSet`, you can use `Sink.collectAllToSet()`. This function ensures that each element appears only once in the resulting set:

```ts twoslash
import { Stream, Sink, Effect } from "effect"

const effect = Stream.make(1, 2, 2, 3, 4, 4).pipe(
  Stream.run(Sink.collectAllToSet())
)

Effect.runPromise(effect).then(console.log)
/*
Output:
{
  _id: "HashSet",
  values: [ 1, 2, 3, 4 ]
}
*/
```

### Collecting into a HashMap

For more advanced collection needs, you can use `Sink.collectAllToMap()`. This function allows you to accumulate and merge elements into a `HashMap<K, A>` using a specified merge function. In the following example, we determine map keys with `(n) => n % 3` and merge elements with the same key using `(a, b) => a + b`:

```ts twoslash
import { Stream, Sink, Effect } from "effect"

const effect = Stream.make(1, 3, 2, 3, 1, 5, 1).pipe(
  Stream.run(
    Sink.collectAllToMap(
      (n) => n % 3,
      (a, b) => a + b
    )
  )
)

Effect.runPromise(effect).then(console.log)
/*
Output:
{
  _id: "HashMap",
  values: [
    [ 0, 6 ], [ 1, 3 ], [ 2, 7 ]
  ]
}
*/
```

### Collecting a Specified Number

If you only want to collect a specific number of elements from a stream into a [`Chunk`](../../data-types/chunk.mdx), you can use `Sink.collectAllN(n)`:

```ts twoslash
import { Stream, Sink, Effect } from "effect"

const effect = Stream.make(1, 2, 3, 4, 5).pipe(
  Stream.run(Sink.collectAllN(3))
)

Effect.runPromise(effect).then(console.log)
/*
Output:
{
  _id: "Chunk",
  values: [ 1, 2, 3 ]
}
*/
```

### Collecting While Meeting a Condition

To accumulate elements as long as they satisfy a specific condition, you can use `Sink.collectAllWhile(predicate)`. This function will keep gathering elements until the predicate returns `false`:

```ts twoslash
import { Stream, Sink, Effect } from "effect"

const effect = Stream.make(1, 2, 0, 4, 0, 6, 7).pipe(
  Stream.run(Sink.collectAllWhile((n) => n !== 0))
)

Effect.runPromise(effect).then(console.log)
/*
Output:
{
  _id: "Chunk",
  values: [ 1, 2 ]
}
*/
```

### Collecting into HashSets of a Specific Size

For more controlled collection into sets with a maximum size of `n`, you can utilize `Sink.collectAllToSetN(n)`:

```ts twoslash
import { Stream, Sink, Effect } from "effect"

const effect = Stream.make(1, 2, 2, 3, 4, 4).pipe(
  Stream.run(Sink.collectAllToSetN(3))
)

Effect.runPromise(effect).then(console.log)
/*
Output:
{
  _id: "HashSet",
  values: [ 1, 2, 3 ]
}
*/
```

### Collecting into HashMaps with Limited Keys

If you need to accumulate elements into maps with a maximum of `n` keys, you can employ `Sink.collectAllToMapN(n, keyFunction, mergeFunction)`:

```ts twoslash
import { Stream, Sink, Effect } from "effect"

const effect = Stream.make(1, 3, 2, 3, 1, 5, 1).pipe(
  Stream.run(
    Sink.collectAllToMapN(
      3,
      (n) => n,
      (a, b) => a + b
    )
  )
)

Effect.runPromise(effect).then(console.log)
/*
Output:
{
  _id: "HashMap",
  values: [
    [ 1, 2 ], [ 2, 2 ], [ 3, 6 ]
  ]
}
*/
```

## Folding

### Folding Left

Imagine you have a stream of numbers, and you want to reduce them into a single value by applying an operation to each element sequentially. You can achieve this using the `Sink.foldLeft` function:

```ts twoslash
import { Stream, Sink, Effect } from "effect"

const effect = Stream.make(1, 2, 3, 4).pipe(
  Stream.run(Sink.foldLeft(0, (a, b) => a + b))
)

Effect.runPromise(effect).then(console.log)
/*
Output:
10
*/
```

### Folding with Termination

In some cases, you may want to fold elements in a stream but stop the folding process when a certain condition is met. This is called "short-circuiting." You can achieve this using the `Sink.fold` function, which allows you to specify a termination predicate:

```ts twoslash
import { Stream, Sink, Effect } from "effect"

const effect = Stream.iterate(0, (n) => n + 1).pipe(
  Stream.run(
    Sink.fold(
      0,
      (sum) => sum <= 10,
      (a, b) => a + b
    )
  )
)

Effect.runPromise(effect).then(console.log)
/*
Output:
15
*/
```

### Folding with Weighted Elements

Sometimes, you may want to fold elements based on their weight or cost, accumulating them until a certain maximum cost is reached. You can do this using `Sink.foldWeighted`. In the following example, we group elements based on a weight of 1, restarting the folding process when the total weight reaches 3:

```ts twoslash
import { Stream, Sink, Chunk, Effect } from "effect"

const stream = Stream.make(3, 2, 4, 1, 5, 6, 2, 1, 3, 5, 6).pipe(
  Stream.transduce(
    Sink.foldWeighted({
      initial: Chunk.empty<number>(),
      maxCost: 3,
      cost: () => 1,
      body: (acc, el) => Chunk.append(acc, el)
    })
  )
)

Effect.runPromise(Stream.runCollect(stream)).then(console.log)
/*
Output:
{
  _id: "Chunk",
  values: [
    {
      _id: "Chunk",
      values: [ 3, 2, 4 ]
    }, {
      _id: "Chunk",
      values: [ 1, 5, 6 ]
    }, {
      _id: "Chunk",
      values: [ 2, 1, 3 ]
    }, {
      _id: "Chunk",
      values: [ 5, 6 ]
    }
  ]
}
*/
```

### Folding Until a Limit

If you want to fold elements up to a specific limit, you can use `Sink.foldUntil`. In the following example, we fold elements until we have accumulated 3 of them:

```ts twoslash
import { Stream, Sink, Effect } from "effect"

const effect = Stream.make(1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10).pipe(
  Stream.run(Sink.foldUntil(0, 3, (a, b) => a + b))
)

Effect.runPromise(effect).then(console.log)
/*
Output:
6
*/
```
