content/docs/400-guides/660-streaming/200-sink/500-leftovers.mdx, before:

---
title: Leftovers
excerpt: Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet, consetetur sadipscing elitr, sed diam nonumy eirmod tempor invidunt ut labore.
---

In this section, we'll explore how to deal with elements that may be left unconsumed by sinks. Sinks can consume varying numbers of elements from their upstream, and we'll learn how to collect or ignore any leftovers.

## Collecting Leftovers

When a sink consumes elements from an upstream source, it may not use all of them. These unconsumed elements are referred to as "leftovers." To collect these leftovers, we can use `Sink.collectLeftover`. It returns a tuple containing the result of the previous sink operation and any leftover elements:

```ts twoslash
import { Stream, Sink, Effect } from "effect"

const s1 = Stream.make(1, 2, 3, 4, 5).pipe(
  Stream.run(Sink.take<number>(3).pipe(Sink.collectLeftover))
)

Effect.runPromise(s1).then(console.log)
/*
Output:
[
  {
    _id: "Chunk",
    values: [ 1, 2, 3 ]
  }, {
    _id: "Chunk",
    values: [ 4, 5 ]
  }
]
*/

const s2 = Stream.make(1, 2, 3, 4, 5).pipe(
  Stream.run(Sink.head<number>().pipe(Sink.collectLeftover))
)

Effect.runPromise(s2).then(console.log)
/*
Output:
[
  {
    _id: "Option",
    _tag: "Some",
    value: 1
  }, {
    _id: "Chunk",
    values: [ 2, 3, 4, 5 ]
  }
]
*/
```

## Ignoring Leftovers

When leftover elements are not needed, they can be ignored using `Sink.ignoreLeftover`:

```ts twoslash
import { Stream, Sink, Effect } from "effect"

const s1 = Stream.make(1, 2, 3, 4, 5).pipe(
  Stream.run(
    Sink.take<number>(3).pipe(Sink.ignoreLeftover).pipe(Sink.collectLeftover)
  )
)

Effect.runPromise(s1).then(console.log)
/*
Output:
[
  {
    _id: "Chunk",
    values: [ 1, 2, 3 ]
  }, {
    _id: "Chunk",
    values: []
  }
]
*/
```

Commit message:

replace excerpt placeholders with actual content (index pages excluded)

content/docs/400-guides/660-streaming/200-sink/500-leftovers.mdx, after:

---
title: Leftovers
excerpt: Explore handling unconsumed elements with sinks. Learn to collect or ignore leftovers using `Sink.collectLeftover` and `Sink.ignoreLeftover`. Efficiently manage and process remaining elements from upstream sources in data streams.
bottomNavigation: pagination
---

In this section, we'll explore how to deal with elements that may be left unconsumed by sinks. Sinks can consume varying numbers of elements from their upstream, and we'll learn how to collect or ignore any leftovers.

## Collecting Leftovers

When a sink consumes elements from an upstream source, it may not use all of them. These unconsumed elements are referred to as "leftovers." To collect these leftovers, we can use `Sink.collectLeftover`. It returns a tuple containing the result of the previous sink operation and any leftover elements:

```ts twoslash
import { Stream, Sink, Effect } from "effect"

const s1 = Stream.make(1, 2, 3, 4, 5).pipe(
  Stream.run(Sink.take<number>(3).pipe(Sink.collectLeftover))
)

Effect.runPromise(s1).then(console.log)
/*
Output:
[
  {
    _id: "Chunk",
    values: [ 1, 2, 3 ]
  }, {
    _id: "Chunk",
    values: [ 4, 5 ]
  }
]
*/

const s2 = Stream.make(1, 2, 3, 4, 5).pipe(
  Stream.run(Sink.head<number>().pipe(Sink.collectLeftover))
)

Effect.runPromise(s2).then(console.log)
/*
Output:
[
  {
    _id: "Option",
    _tag: "Some",
    value: 1
  }, {
    _id: "Chunk",
    values: [ 2, 3, 4, 5 ]
  }
]
*/
```

## Ignoring Leftovers

When leftover elements are not needed, they can be ignored using `Sink.ignoreLeftover`:

```ts twoslash
import { Stream, Sink, Effect } from "effect"

const s1 = Stream.make(1, 2, 3, 4, 5).pipe(
  Stream.run(
    Sink.take<number>(3).pipe(Sink.ignoreLeftover).pipe(Sink.collectLeftover)
  )
)

Effect.runPromise(s1).then(console.log)
/*
Output:
[
  {
    _id: "Chunk",
    values: [ 1, 2, 3 ]
  }, {
    _id: "Chunk",
    values: []
  }
]
*/
```
