content/src/content/docs/blog/this-week-in-effect/2024/12/27.mdx, before:

---
title: This Week in Effect - 2024-12-27
excerpt: Effect 3.12 Release. Happy Holidays from the Effect Team
date: 2024-12-27
authors:
  - davide_scognamiglio
  - mirela_prifti
  - michael_arnaldi
tags:
  - This Week In Effect
---

import { YouTube } from "@astro-community/astro-embed-youtube"
import Tweet from "astro-tweet"
import TwitchPlayerNonInteractive from "@/components/TwitchPlayerNonInteractive.astro"

Hi Effecters!

Welcome back to This Week In Effect (**TWIE**) - your weekly update of the latest developments in the Effect community and ecosystem.

Effect is a powerful TypeScript library that helps developers create complex, synchronous, and asynchronous programs. One key feature that sets Effect apart is how it leverages structured concurrency to provide features such as async cancellation and safe resource management, making it easier to build robust, scalable, and efficient programs.

To get started, below you’ll find links to our documentation as well as our guide for installing Effect. Enjoy!

- [Effect Documentation](/docs/getting-started/introduction/)
- [Installing Effect](/docs/getting-started/installation/)

Recent major updates:

- Effect is API stable with the [Effect 3.0 release](https://effect.website/blog/effect-3.0).
- [Effect 3.12](https://effect.website/blog/releases/effect/312) has been released.
- The [Effect community](https://discord.gg/effect-ts) on Discord reached 3740+ members!

&nbsp;
## Technology

- [Effect 3.12](https://effect.website/blog/releases/effect/312) has been released!
  <Tweet id="1871149531594674656" />

Here are all the technical changes from this week (note that changes included in the 3.12 release will not be listed).

### Effect Core
- [Schema: refactor annotations](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/4175) (Refactor)
- [Schema: Fix bug where calling withDecodingDefault after 'withConstructorDefault' removed the constructor default.](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/4180) (Bug Fix)
- [Schema: Fix withDecodingDefault implementation to align with its signature (now removes undefined from the AST).](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/4181) (Bug Fix)
- [Replace absolute imports with relative ones](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/4182) (Bug Fix)
- [Schema: chore, remove duplicate code](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/4183) (Enhancement)
- [Ensure Effect.timeoutTo sleep is interrupted](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/4189) (Bug Fix)
- [Extend IterableIterator instead of Generator](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/4190) (Bug Fix)

### Effect Vitest
- [Support native arbitraries in @effect/vitest](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/4173) (Feature)


&nbsp;
## Happy Holidays from the Effect Team

As we share the final weekly update of the year, we want to thank you for your continued support and contributions to the Effect ecosystem.

2024 has been a year of significant milestones, including the release of Effect 3.0 (our first stable version), the first Effect Days conference in Vienna, and winning The Most Exciting Technology 2024 award at the JSNation conference in Amsterdam. Effect was also featured in numerous meetups and conferences, with more developers choosing it as a topic of discussion.

Additionally, we launched the [Effect Playground](https://effect.website/play) and the new Effect Website 2.0, designed to provide better functionality and an improved user experience.

As we look ahead to 2025, we’re excited to continue building and growing with you through new technical advancements and community initiatives.

Wishing you happy holidays and a great start to the New Year!

The Effect Team


&nbsp;
## Community highlights

- [Tylor Steinberger](https://github.com/TylorS) built a [type-safe Route abstraction](https://github.com/TylorS/typed-route) with type-level support for matching and interpolation path-to-regex-style paths atop of Effect Schema

- The FrontEnd Queens community published "Introduction to Effect: Next Generation TypeScript", a talk by Laure Retru-Chavastel. Laure is an Effect advocate and a  Full-Stack Software Engineer at [Inato](https://inato.com/).

<YouTube
  id="https://youtu.be/bfQaG1fL-F0"
  title="Introduction to Effect: Next Generation TypeScript"
/>

&nbsp;
## Effect Days 2025
The Effect Days conference is happening on March 19-21, 2025, and it’s the perfect chance to connect with the Effect community and celebrate the Effect ecosystem in person! [Get your ticket! 🎟️](https://effect.website/events/effect-days)

Shout out to one of our sponsors, [Inato](https://inato.com/), a global clinical trial marketplace that brings research to patients where they live. The Inato team has always supported Effect, actively advocating for it within the developer community.

&nbsp;
## Effect Merch Store
Last week we unveiled the [Effect Merch Store](https://effect.website/merch). Explore a selection of Effect-branded items, designed for the community. All orders are processed through [Printful](https://www.printful.com/).
  <Tweet id="1868605126862385238" />

&nbsp;
## Effect job opportunities

More and more companies are adopting Effect in their projects—here’s a list of exciting job opportunities that include Effect in their tech stack:

- **Superwall**: [Full-stack TS developer](https://twitter.com/jakemor/status/1854248980454228411) with backend & infrastructure experience.

- **Expand.ai**: [Software Engineer](https://twitter.com/getexpandai/status/1858674403430854823)

- **Platonic Systems**: [Remote Effect Engineers](https://twitter.com/platonicsystems/status/1861470819861311945)

- **Inato**: [Senior Product Engineer](https://jobs.lever.co/inato/2bbbe759-d4ce-4cc4-8267-8bc998189469)

- **Medbill.ai**: [Founding Software Engineers (full-stack and backend)](https://www.linkedin.com/posts/codingtom_medbill-ai-activity-7260092522708762624-N7TH)

- **inRev**: [Senior Software Engineer](https://jobs.gusto.com/postings/inrev-llc-senior-full-stack-engineer-332c0453-fd2d-457f-b30c-f5a0e999cbc5)

- **Oneiro Solutions**: Software Engineer - Core Team. [Join our Discord](https://discord.com/channels/795981131316985866/796153351372275743) and DM **leighman** for further info.

*Disclaimer: Please note that these job postings are shared for informational purposes, and we encourage applicants to verify details directly with the hiring companies.*

&nbsp;
## Cause & Effect Podcast
Don't forget to listen to our **Cause & Effect** podcast hosted by Johannes Schickling, and available on [Youtube](https://www.youtube.com/@effect-ts), [X(Twitter)](https://x.com/EffectTS_/status/1861446144137531585), and audio platforms like [Spotify](https://open.spotify.com/episode/7Bkn7A8EXnoqWWmI0czAdz) and [Apple Podcast](https://podcasts.apple.com/us/podcast/cause-effect/id1781879869). This podcast highlights stories from software engineers and companies using Effect in production. Each episode explores their journey of adopting Effect, the learning process, the challenges faced, and the benefits of integrating Effect into their tech stack.

In our first episode, we were joined by [Attila Večerek](https://x.com/attilavecerek), Tech Lead & Staff Engineer, who discussed how [Zendesk](https://www.zendesk.com) incrementally adopted Effect in a polyglot environment with a large codebase. Give it a listen and let us know what you think on our social media or [Discord](https://discord.gg/effect-ts)!

<YouTube
  id="https://youtu.be/rNAqPHBQFEQ"
  title="Adopting Effect at Zendesk w/ Attila Večerek | Cause & Effect #1"
/>

&nbsp;
## Closing notes

That's all for this week. Thank you for being a vital part of our community. Your feedback is highly valued as we fine-tune this format. Feel free to share your thoughts, and we'll do our best to tailor it to the needs of our community.

_Effect Community Team_

Commit message:

add latest prs and Dillon streams

content/src/content/docs/blog/this-week-in-effect/2024/12/27.mdx, after:

---
title: This Week in Effect - 2024-12-27
excerpt: Effect 3.12 Release. Happy Holidays from the Effect Team
date: 2024-12-27
authors:
  - davide_scognamiglio
  - mirela_prifti
  - michael_arnaldi
tags:
  - This Week In Effect
---

import { YouTube } from "@astro-community/astro-embed-youtube"
import Tweet from "astro-tweet"
import TwitchPlayerNonInteractive from "@/components/TwitchPlayerNonInteractive.astro"

Hi Effecters!

Welcome back to This Week In Effect (**TWIE**) - your weekly update of the latest developments in the Effect community and ecosystem.

Effect is a powerful TypeScript library that helps developers create complex, synchronous, and asynchronous programs. One key feature that sets Effect apart is how it leverages structured concurrency to provide features such as async cancellation and safe resource management, making it easier to build robust, scalable, and efficient programs.

To get started, below you’ll find links to our documentation as well as our guide for installing Effect. Enjoy!

- [Effect Documentation](/docs/getting-started/introduction/)
- [Installing Effect](/docs/getting-started/installation/)

Recent major updates:

- Effect is API stable with the [Effect 3.0 release](https://effect.website/blog/effect-3.0).
- [Effect 3.12](https://effect.website/blog/releases/effect/312) has been released.
- The [Effect community](https://discord.gg/effect-ts) on Discord reached 3740+ members!

&nbsp;
## Technology

- [Effect 3.12](https://effect.website/blog/releases/effect/312) has been released!
  <Tweet id="1871149531594674656" />

Here are all the technical changes from this week (note that changes included in the 3.12 release will not be listed).

### Effect Core
- [Schema: refactor annotations](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/4175) (Refactor)
- [Schema: Fix bug where calling withDecodingDefault after 'withConstructorDefault' removed the constructor default.](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/4180) (Bug Fix)
- [Schema: Fix withDecodingDefault implementation to align with its signature (now removes undefined from the AST).](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/4181) (Bug Fix)
- [Replace absolute imports with relative ones](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/4182) (Bug Fix)
- [Schema: chore, remove duplicate code](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/4183) (Enhancement)
- [Ensure Effect.timeoutTo sleep is interrupted](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/4189) (Bug Fix)
- [Extend IterableIterator instead of Generator](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/4190) (Bug Fix)
- [ConcurrentFinalizers in Effect.all implementation](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/4194) (Bug Fix)
- [Avoid putting symbols in global to fix incompatibility with Temporal Sandbox.](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/4196) (Bug Fix)

### Effect Vitest
- [Support native arbitraries in @effect/vitest](https://github.com/Effect-TS/effect/pull/4173) (Feature)


&nbsp;
## Happy Holidays from the Effect Team

As we share the final weekly update of the year, we want to thank you for your continued support and contributions to the Effect ecosystem.

2024 has been a year of significant milestones, including the release of Effect 3.0 (our first stable version), the first Effect Days conference in Vienna, and winning The Most Exciting Technology 2024 award at the JSNation conference in Amsterdam. Effect was also featured in numerous meetups and conferences, with more developers choosing it as a topic of discussion.

Additionally, we launched the [Effect Playground](https://effect.website/play) and the new Effect Website 2.0, designed to provide better functionality and an improved user experience.

As we look ahead to 2025, we’re excited to continue building and growing with you through new technical advancements and community initiatives.

Wishing you happy holidays and a great start to the New Year!

The Effect Team


&nbsp;
## Community highlights

- [Tylor Steinberger](https://github.com/TylorS) built a [type-safe Route abstraction](https://github.com/TylorS/typed-route) with type-level support for matching and interpolation path-to-regex-style paths atop of Effect Schema.

- Dillon Mulroy livestreamed two episodes of his series **Integrating Stripe with Svelte 5 and EffectTS 🚀** on his Twitch channel.
  <TwitchPlayerNonInteractive video="2336322670" />

- The FrontEnd Queens community published "Introduction to Effect: Next Generation TypeScript", a talk by Laure Retru-Chavastel. Laure is an Effect advocate and a  Full-Stack Software Engineer at [Inato](https://inato.com/).

<YouTube
  id="https://youtu.be/bfQaG1fL-F0"
  title="Introduction to Effect: Next Generation TypeScript"
/>

&nbsp;
## Effect Days 2025
The Effect Days conference is happening on March 19-21, 2025, and it’s the perfect chance to connect with the Effect community and celebrate the Effect ecosystem in person! [Get your ticket! 🎟️](https://effect.website/events/effect-days)

Shout out to one of our sponsors, [Inato](https://inato.com/), a global clinical trial marketplace that brings research to patients where they live. The Inato team has always supported Effect, actively advocating for it within the developer community.

&nbsp;
## Effect Merch Store
Last week we unveiled the [Effect Merch Store](https://effect.website/merch). Explore a selection of Effect-branded items, designed for the community. All orders are processed through [Printful](https://www.printful.com/).
  <Tweet id="1868605126862385238" />

&nbsp;
## Effect job opportunities

More and more companies are adopting Effect in their projects—here’s a list of exciting job opportunities that include Effect in their tech stack:

- **Superwall**: [Full-stack TS developer](https://twitter.com/jakemor/status/1854248980454228411) with backend & infrastructure experience.

- **Expand.ai**: [Software Engineer](https://twitter.com/getexpandai/status/1858674403430854823)

- **Platonic Systems**: [Remote Effect Engineers](https://twitter.com/platonicsystems/status/1861470819861311945)

- **Inato**: [Senior Product Engineer](https://jobs.lever.co/inato/2bbbe759-d4ce-4cc4-8267-8bc998189469)

- **Medbill.ai**: [Founding Software Engineers (full-stack and backend)](https://www.linkedin.com/posts/codingtom_medbill-ai-activity-7260092522708762624-N7TH)

- **inRev**: [Senior Software Engineer](https://jobs.gusto.com/postings/inrev-llc-senior-full-stack-engineer-332c0453-fd2d-457f-b30c-f5a0e999cbc5)

- **Oneiro Solutions**: Software Engineer - Core Team. [Join our Discord](https://discord.com/channels/795981131316985866/796153351372275743) and DM **leighman** for further info.

*Disclaimer: Please note that these job postings are shared for informational purposes, and we encourage applicants to verify details directly with the hiring companies.*

&nbsp;
## Cause & Effect Podcast
Don't forget to listen to our **Cause & Effect** podcast hosted by Johannes Schickling, and available on [Youtube](https://www.youtube.com/@effect-ts), [X(Twitter)](https://x.com/EffectTS_/status/1861446144137531585), and audio platforms like [Spotify](https://open.spotify.com/episode/7Bkn7A8EXnoqWWmI0czAdz) and [Apple Podcast](https://podcasts.apple.com/us/podcast/cause-effect/id1781879869). This podcast highlights stories from software engineers and companies using Effect in production. Each episode explores their journey of adopting Effect, the learning process, the challenges faced, and the benefits of integrating Effect into their tech stack.

In our first episode, we were joined by [Attila Večerek](https://x.com/attilavecerek), Tech Lead & Staff Engineer, who discussed how [Zendesk](https://www.zendesk.com) incrementally adopted Effect in a polyglot environment with a large codebase. Give it a listen and let us know what you think on our social media or [Discord](https://discord.gg/effect-ts)!

<YouTube
  id="https://youtu.be/rNAqPHBQFEQ"
  title="Adopting Effect at Zendesk w/ Attila Večerek | Cause & Effect #1"
/>

&nbsp;
## Closing notes

That's all for this week. Thank you for being a vital part of our community. Your feedback is highly valued as we fine-tune this format. Feel free to share your thoughts, and we'll do our best to tailor it to the needs of our community.

_Effect Community Team_
