content/docs/400-guides/100-essentials/200-the-effect-type.mdx, before:

---
title: The Effect Type
excerpt: Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet, consetetur sadipscing elitr, sed diam nonumy eirmod tempor invidunt ut labore.
bottomNavigation: pagination
---

The `Effect<Requirements, Error, Value>` type represents an **immutable** value that **lazily** describes a workflow or job.

It encapsulates the logic of a program that requires a collection of contextual data `Context<Requirements>` to execute.
This program can either fail, produce an error of type `Error`, or succeed, yielding a value of type `Value`.

Conceptually, you can think of `Effect<Requirements, Error, Value>` as an effectful version of the following function type:

```ts
type Effect<Requirements, Error, Value> = (
  context: Context<Requirements>
) => Error | Value
```

Effects are not actually functions, of course, they can model synchronous, asynchronous, concurrent, and resourceful computations.

## Type Parameters

The `Effect` type has three type parameters with the following meanings:

- **Requirements**. Represents the contextual data required by the effect to be executed.
  This data is stored in a collection named `Context`.
  If this type parameter is `never`, it means the effect has no requirements and the `Context` collection is empty.
- **Error**. Represents the expected errors that can occur when executing an effect.
  If this type parameter is `never`, it means the effect cannot fail, because there are no values of type `never`.
- **Value**. Represents the type of value that an effect can succeed with when executed.
  If this type parameter is `void`, it means the effect produces no useful information, while if it is `never`, it means the effect runs forever (or until failure).

<Info>
  In the Effect ecosystem, you may often encounter the type parameters of
  `Effect` abbreviated as `R`, `E`, and `A` respectively. This is just
  shorthand for **R**equirements, **E**rror, and the success value of type
  **A**.
</Info>

`Effect` values are immutable, and all Effect functions produce new `Effect` values.

`Effect` values do not actually do anything, they are just values that model or describe effectful interactions.

An `Effect` can be interpreted by the Effect Runtime System into effectful interactions with the external world.
Ideally, this occurs at a single time, in our application's `main` function.

Commit message:

replace excerpt placeholders with actual content (index pages excluded) (#424)

content/docs/400-guides/100-essentials/200-the-effect-type.mdx, after:

---
title: The Effect Type
excerpt: Explore the `Effect<Requirements, Error, Value>` type in the Effect ecosystem, representing an immutable, lazy description of a workflow or job. Understand its type parameters and conceptualize it as an effectful program. Learn how to interpret `Effect` values with the Effect Runtime System for effectful interactions with the external world.
bottomNavigation: pagination
---

The `Effect<Requirements, Error, Value>` type represents an **immutable** value that **lazily** describes a workflow or job.

It encapsulates the logic of a program that requires a collection of contextual data `Context<Requirements>` to execute.
This program can either fail, produce an error of type `Error`, or succeed, yielding a value of type `Value`.

Conceptually, you can think of `Effect<Requirements, Error, Value>` as an effectful version of the following function type:

```ts
type Effect<Requirements, Error, Value> = (
  context: Context<Requirements>
) => Error | Value
```

Effects are not actually functions, of course, they can model synchronous, asynchronous, concurrent, and resourceful computations.

## Type Parameters

The `Effect` type has three type parameters with the following meanings:

- **Requirements**. Represents the contextual data required by the effect to be executed.
  This data is stored in a collection named `Context`.
  If this type parameter is `never`, it means the effect has no requirements and the `Context` collection is empty.
- **Error**. Represents the expected errors that can occur when executing an effect.
  If this type parameter is `never`, it means the effect cannot fail, because there are no values of type `never`.
- **Value**. Represents the type of value that an effect can succeed with when executed.
  If this type parameter is `void`, it means the effect produces no useful information, while if it is `never`, it means the effect runs forever (or until failure).

<Info>
  In the Effect ecosystem, you may often encounter the type parameters of
  `Effect` abbreviated as `R`, `E`, and `A` respectively. This is just
  shorthand for **R**equirements, **E**rror, and the success value of type
  **A**.
</Info>

`Effect` values are immutable, and all Effect functions produce new `Effect` values.

`Effect` values do not actually do anything, they are just values that model or describe effectful interactions.

An `Effect` can be interpreted by the Effect Runtime System into effectful interactions with the external world.
Ideally, this occurs at a single time, in our application's `main` function.
