content/docs/400-guides/100-essentials/300-creating-effects.mdx, before:

---
title: Creating Effects
excerpt: Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet, consetetur sadipscing elitr, sed diam nonumy eirmod tempor invidunt ut labore.
bottomNavigation: pagination
---

Effect provides different ways to create effects, which are units of computation that encapsulate side effects.
In this guide, we will cover some of the common methods that you can use to create effects.

## Why Not Throw Errors?

In traditional programming, when an error occurs, it is often handled by throwing an exception:

```ts twoslash
const divide = (a: number, b: number): number => {
  if (b === 0) {
    throw new Error("Cannot divide by zero")
  }
  return a / b
}
```

However, throwing errors can be problematic. The type signatures of functions do not indicate that they can throw exceptions, making it difficult to reason about potential errors.

To address this issue, Effect introduces dedicated constructors for creating effects that represent both success and failure: `Effect.succeed` and `Effect.fail`. These constructors allow you to explicitly handle success and failure cases while **leveraging the type system to track errors**.

### succeed

To create an effect that represents a successful computation, you can use the `Effect.succeed` constructor. It takes a value as input and produces an effect that succeeds with that value. Here's an example:

```ts twoslash
import { Effect } from "effect"

const program = Effect.succeed(42)
```

The `program` value has the type `Effect<never, never, number>` and can be interpreted as an effect that:

- does not require any context (`never`)
- does not produce any expected error (`never`)
- succeeds with a value of type `number`

### fail

To create an effect that represents a failure, you can use the `Effect.fail` constructor. It takes an error value as input and produces an effect that fails with that error. Here's an example:

```ts twoslash
import { Effect } from "effect"

const program = Effect.fail("my error")
```

The `program` value has the type `Effect<never, string, never>` and can be interpreted as an effect that:

- does not require any context (`never`)
- fails with an expected error of type `string`
- does not produce any value (`never`)

With `Effect.succeed` and `Effect.fail`, you can explicitly handle success and failure cases and the type system will ensure that errors are tracked and accounted for.

Let's see an example of rewriting the `divide` function using Effect to make the error handling explicit:

```ts twoslash
import { Effect } from "effect"

const divide = (a: number, b: number): Effect.Effect<never, Error, number> =>
  b === 0
    ? Effect.fail(new Error("Cannot divide by zero"))
    : Effect.succeed(a / b)
```

In this example, the `divide` function explicitly indicates that it can produce an effect that either fails with an `Error` or succeeds with a `number` value. The type signature makes it clear how errors are handled and ensures that callers are aware of the possible outcomes.

## Modeling Synchronous Effects

In JavaScript, you can delay the execution of a synchronous computation using a "thunk".

<Info>
  A "thunk" is a function that takes no arguments and may return some value.
</Info>

Thunks are useful for delaying the computation of a value until it is needed.

To model synchronous side effects, Effect provides the `Effect.sync` and `Effect.try` constructors, which accept a thunk.

### sync

If you're working with synchronous side effects and you're confident that they will **never throw errors**, you can use the `Effect.sync` constructor:

```ts twoslash
import { Effect } from "effect"

const program = Effect.sync(() => {
  console.log("Hello, World!") // side effect
  return 42 // return value
})
```

In the above example, `Effect.sync` is used to defer the side-effect of writing to the console.

The `program` value has the type `Effect<never, never, number>` because the thunk returns the value `42`.

Note that nothing is logged to the console yet when you inspect it.
This is because `program` represents the action of writing to the console, but nothing happens until you explicitly [run your program](running-effects).

<Error>The thunk passed to `Effect.sync` should never throw errors.</Error>

### try

If the synchronous computation within the thunk may throw an error, you can use the `Effect.try` constructor.
If an error is caught, it will be propagated to the error channel as `UnknownException`:

```ts twoslash
import { Effect } from "effect"

const program = Effect.try(
  () => JSON.parse("") // JSON.parse may throw for bad input
)
```

If you want more control over what gets propagated to the error channel, you can use an overload of `Effect.try` that takes a remapping function:

```ts {5} twoslash
import { Effect } from "effect"

const program = Effect.try({
  try: () => JSON.parse(""), // JSON.parse may throw for bad input
  catch: (unknown) => new Error(`something went wrong ${unknown}`) // remap the error
})
```

You can think of this as a similar pattern to the traditional try-catch block in JavaScript:

```ts
try {
  return JSON.parse("")
} catch (unknown) {
  throw new Error(`something went wrong ${unknown}`)
}
```

## Modeling Asynchronous Effects

In traditional programming, we often use `Promise`s to handle asynchronous computations. However, dealing with errors in promises can be problematic. By default, `Promise<Value>` only provides the type `Value` for the resolved value, which means errors are not reflected in the type system. This limits the expressiveness and makes it challenging to handle and track errors effectively.

To overcome these limitations, Effect introduces dedicated constructors for creating effects that represent both success and failure in an asynchronous context: `Effect.promise` and `Effect.tryPromise`. These constructors allow you to explicitly handle success and failure cases while **leveraging the type system to track errors**.

### promise

If you're working with asynchronous side effects that return a `Promise` and you're confident that the `Promise` will **never reject**, you can use the `Effect.promise` constructor:

```ts twoslash
import { Effect } from "effect"

const program = Effect.promise<string>(
  () =>
    new Promise((resolve) => {
      setTimeout(() => {
        resolve("Async operation completed successfully!")
      }, 2000)
    })
)
```

The `program` value has the type `Effect<never, never, string>` and can be interpreted as an effect that:

- does not require any context (`never`)
- does not produce any expected error (`never`)
- succeeds with a value of type `string`

<Error>
  The `Promise` within the thunk passed to `Effect.promise` should never
  reject.
</Error>

### tryPromise

If the `Promise` within the thunk may reject, you can use the `Effect.tryPromise` constructor.
If an error is caught, it will be propagated to the error channel as `UnknownException`:

```ts twoslash
import { Effect } from "effect"

const program = Effect.tryPromise(() =>
  fetch("https://jsonplaceholder.typicode.com/todos/1")
)
```

If you want more control over what gets propagated to the error channel, you can use an overload of `Effect.tryPromise` that takes a remapping function:

```ts {5} twoslash
import { Effect } from "effect"

const program = Effect.tryPromise({
  try: () => fetch("https://jsonplaceholder.typicode.com/todos/1"),
  catch: (unknown) => new Error(`something went wrong ${unknown}`) // remap the error
})
```

## From a callback

Sometimes you have to work with APIs that don't support `async/await` or `Promise` and instead use the callback style.
To handle callback-based APIs, Effect provides the `Effect.async` constructor.

For example, let's wrap the `readFile` async API from the Node.js `fs` module with Effect (ensure you have `@types/node` installed):

```ts twoslash
// @types: node
import { Effect } from "effect"
import * as NodeFS from "node:fs"

const program = Effect.async<never, Error, Buffer>((resume) => {
  NodeFS.readFile("todos.txt", (error, data) => {
    if (error) {
      resume(Effect.fail(error))
    } else {
      resume(Effect.succeed(data))
    }
  })
})
```

In the above example, we manually annotate the types when calling `Effect.async` because TypeScript cannot infer the type parameters for a callback
based on the return value inside the callback body. Annotating the types ensures that the values provided to `resume` match the expected types.

<Idea>
  You can seamlessly mix synchronous and asynchronous code within the Effect
  framework. Everything becomes an Effect, enabling you to handle different
  types of side effects in a unified way.
</Idea>

## Suspended Effects

`Effect.suspend` is used to delay the creation of an effect.
It allows you to defer the evaluation of an effect until it is actually needed.
The `Effect.suspend` function takes a thunk that represents the effect, and it wraps it in a suspended effect.

```ts
const suspendedEffect = Effect.suspend(() => effect)
```

Let's explore some common scenarios where `Effect.suspend` proves useful:

1. **Lazy Evaluation**. When you want to defer the evaluation of an effect until it is required. This can be useful for optimizing the execution of effects, especially when they are not always needed or when their computation is expensive.

   Also, when effects with side effects or scoped captures are created, use `Effect.suspend` to re-execute on each invocation.

   ```ts twoslash
   import { Effect } from "effect"

   let i = 0

   const bad = Effect.succeed(i++)

   const good = Effect.suspend(() => Effect.succeed(i++))

   console.log(Effect.runSync(bad)) // Output: 0
   console.log(Effect.runSync(bad)) // Output: 0

   console.log(Effect.runSync(good)) // Output: 1
   console.log(Effect.runSync(good)) // Output: 2
   ```

   In this example, `Effect.succeed(i++)` creates a new numeric value and consistently returns the same number. On the other hand, `Effect.suspend(() => Effect.succeed(i++))` generates a new number with each invocation.

   This example utilizes `Effect.runSync` to execute effects and display their results (refer to [Running Effects](./running-effects##runsync) for more details).

2. **Handling Circular Dependencies**. `Effect.suspend` is helpful in managing circular dependencies between effects, where one effect depends on another, and vice versa.
   For example it's fairly common for `Effect.suspend` to be used in recursive functions to escape an eager call. For instance:

   ```ts twoslash
   import { Effect } from "effect"

   const blowsUp = (n: number): Effect.Effect<never, never, number> =>
     n < 2
       ? Effect.succeed(1)
       : Effect.zipWith(blowsUp(n - 1), blowsUp(n - 2), (a, b) => a + b)

   // console.log(Effect.runSync(blowsUp(32))) // crash: JavaScript heap out of memory

   const allGood = (n: number): Effect.Effect<never, never, number> =>
     n < 2
       ? Effect.succeed(1)
       : Effect.zipWith(
           Effect.suspend(() => allGood(n - 1)),
           Effect.suspend(() => allGood(n - 2)),
           (a, b) => a + b
         )

   console.log(Effect.runSync(allGood(32))) // Output: 3524578
   ```

3. **Unifying Return Type**. In situations where TypeScript struggles to unify the returned effect type, `Effect.suspend` can be employed to resolve this issue. For example:

   ```ts twoslash
   import { Effect } from "effect"

   const ugly = (a: number, b: number) =>
     b === 0
       ? Effect.fail(new Error("Cannot divide by zero"))
       : Effect.succeed(a / b)

   const nice = (a: number, b: number) =>
     Effect.suspend(() =>
       b === 0
         ? Effect.fail(new Error("Cannot divide by zero"))
         : Effect.succeed(a / b)
     )
   ```

## Cheatsheet

The table provides a summary of the available constructors, along with their input and output types, allowing you to choose the appropriate function based on your needs.

| **Function**            | **Given**                               | **To**                               |
| ----------------------- | --------------------------------------- | ------------------------------------ |
| `succeed`               | `A`                                     | `Effect<never, never, A>`            |
| `fail`                  | `E`                                     | `Effect<never, E, never>`            |
| `sync`                  | `() => A`                               | `Effect<never, never, A>`            |
| `try`                   | `() => A`                               | `Effect<never, UnknownException, A>` |
| `try` (overload)        | `() => A`, `unknown => E`               | `Effect<never, E, A>`                |
| `promise`               | `() => Promise<A>`                      | `Effect<never, never, A>`            |
| `tryPromise`            | `() => Promise<A>`                      | `Effect<never, UnknownException, A>` |
| `tryPromise` (overload) | `() => Promise<A>`, `unknown => E`      | `Effect<never, E, A>`                |
| `async`                 | `(Effect<never, E, A> => void) => void` | `Effect<never, E, A>`                |
| `suspend`               | `() => Effect<R, E, A>`                 | `Effect<R, E, A>`                    |

You can find the complete list of constructors [here](https://effect-ts.github.io/effect/effect/Effect.ts.html#constructors).

Now that we know how to create effects, it's time to learn how to run them.
Check out the next guide on [Running Effects](running-effects) to find out more.

Commit message:

replace excerpt placeholders with actual content (index pages excluded) (#424)

content/docs/400-guides/100-essentials/300-creating-effects.mdx, after:

---
title: Creating Effects
excerpt: Learn various methods to create effects in the Effect ecosystem. Understand the drawbacks of throwing errors in traditional programming and explore constructors like `Effect.succeed` and `Effect.fail` for explicit success and failure handling. Dive into modeling synchronous effects with `Effect.sync` and `Effect.try`, and asynchronous effects with `Effect.promise` and `Effect.tryPromise`. Explore `Effect.async` for callback-based APIs and `Effect.suspend` for deferred effect evaluation. Check out a cheatsheet summarizing available constructors.
bottomNavigation: pagination
---

Effect provides different ways to create effects, which are units of computation that encapsulate side effects.
In this guide, we will cover some of the common methods that you can use to create effects.

## Why Not Throw Errors?

In traditional programming, when an error occurs, it is often handled by throwing an exception:

```ts twoslash
const divide = (a: number, b: number): number => {
  if (b === 0) {
    throw new Error("Cannot divide by zero")
  }
  return a / b
}
```

However, throwing errors can be problematic. The type signatures of functions do not indicate that they can throw exceptions, making it difficult to reason about potential errors.

To address this issue, Effect introduces dedicated constructors for creating effects that represent both success and failure: `Effect.succeed` and `Effect.fail`. These constructors allow you to explicitly handle success and failure cases while **leveraging the type system to track errors**.

### succeed

To create an effect that represents a successful computation, you can use the `Effect.succeed` constructor. It takes a value as input and produces an effect that succeeds with that value. Here's an example:

```ts twoslash
import { Effect } from "effect"

const program = Effect.succeed(42)
```

The `program` value has the type `Effect<never, never, number>` and can be interpreted as an effect that:

- does not require any context (`never`)
- does not produce any expected error (`never`)
- succeeds with a value of type `number`

### fail

To create an effect that represents a failure, you can use the `Effect.fail` constructor. It takes an error value as input and produces an effect that fails with that error. Here's an example:

```ts twoslash
import { Effect } from "effect"

const program = Effect.fail("my error")
```

The `program` value has the type `Effect<never, string, never>` and can be interpreted as an effect that:

- does not require any context (`never`)
- fails with an expected error of type `string`
- does not produce any value (`never`)

With `Effect.succeed` and `Effect.fail`, you can explicitly handle success and failure cases and the type system will ensure that errors are tracked and accounted for.

Let's see an example of rewriting the `divide` function using Effect to make the error handling explicit:

```ts twoslash
import { Effect } from "effect"

const divide = (a: number, b: number): Effect.Effect<never, Error, number> =>
  b === 0
    ? Effect.fail(new Error("Cannot divide by zero"))
    : Effect.succeed(a / b)
```

In this example, the `divide` function explicitly indicates that it can produce an effect that either fails with an `Error` or succeeds with a `number` value. The type signature makes it clear how errors are handled and ensures that callers are aware of the possible outcomes.

## Modeling Synchronous Effects

In JavaScript, you can delay the execution of a synchronous computation using a "thunk".

<Info>
  A "thunk" is a function that takes no arguments and may return some value.
</Info>

Thunks are useful for delaying the computation of a value until it is needed.

To model synchronous side effects, Effect provides the `Effect.sync` and `Effect.try` constructors, which accept a thunk.

### sync

If you're working with synchronous side effects and you're confident that they will **never throw errors**, you can use the `Effect.sync` constructor:

```ts twoslash
import { Effect } from "effect"

const program = Effect.sync(() => {
  console.log("Hello, World!") // side effect
  return 42 // return value
})
```

In the above example, `Effect.sync` is used to defer the side-effect of writing to the console.

The `program` value has the type `Effect<never, never, number>` because the thunk returns the value `42`.

Note that nothing is logged to the console yet when you inspect it.
This is because `program` represents the action of writing to the console, but nothing happens until you explicitly [run your program](running-effects).

<Error>The thunk passed to `Effect.sync` should never throw errors.</Error>

### try

If the synchronous computation within the thunk may throw an error, you can use the `Effect.try` constructor.
If an error is caught, it will be propagated to the error channel as `UnknownException`:

```ts twoslash
import { Effect } from "effect"

const program = Effect.try(
  () => JSON.parse("") // JSON.parse may throw for bad input
)
```

If you want more control over what gets propagated to the error channel, you can use an overload of `Effect.try` that takes a remapping function:

```ts {5} twoslash
import { Effect } from "effect"

const program = Effect.try({
  try: () => JSON.parse(""), // JSON.parse may throw for bad input
  catch: (unknown) => new Error(`something went wrong ${unknown}`) // remap the error
})
```

You can think of this as a similar pattern to the traditional try-catch block in JavaScript:

```ts
try {
  return JSON.parse("")
} catch (unknown) {
  throw new Error(`something went wrong ${unknown}`)
}
```

## Modeling Asynchronous Effects

In traditional programming, we often use `Promise`s to handle asynchronous computations. However, dealing with errors in promises can be problematic. By default, `Promise<Value>` only provides the type `Value` for the resolved value, which means errors are not reflected in the type system. This limits the expressiveness and makes it challenging to handle and track errors effectively.

To overcome these limitations, Effect introduces dedicated constructors for creating effects that represent both success and failure in an asynchronous context: `Effect.promise` and `Effect.tryPromise`. These constructors allow you to explicitly handle success and failure cases while **leveraging the type system to track errors**.

### promise

If you're working with asynchronous side effects that return a `Promise` and you're confident that the `Promise` will **never reject**, you can use the `Effect.promise` constructor:

```ts twoslash
import { Effect } from "effect"

const program = Effect.promise<string>(
  () =>
    new Promise((resolve) => {
      setTimeout(() => {
        resolve("Async operation completed successfully!")
      }, 2000)
    })
)
```

The `program` value has the type `Effect<never, never, string>` and can be interpreted as an effect that:

- does not require any context (`never`)
- does not produce any expected error (`never`)
- succeeds with a value of type `string`

<Error>
  The `Promise` within the thunk passed to `Effect.promise` should never
  reject.
</Error>

### tryPromise

If the `Promise` within the thunk may reject, you can use the `Effect.tryPromise` constructor.
If an error is caught, it will be propagated to the error channel as `UnknownException`:

```ts twoslash
import { Effect } from "effect"

const program = Effect.tryPromise(() =>
  fetch("https://jsonplaceholder.typicode.com/todos/1")
)
```

If you want more control over what gets propagated to the error channel, you can use an overload of `Effect.tryPromise` that takes a remapping function:

```ts {5} twoslash
import { Effect } from "effect"

const program = Effect.tryPromise({
  try: () => fetch("https://jsonplaceholder.typicode.com/todos/1"),
  catch: (unknown) => new Error(`something went wrong ${unknown}`) // remap the error
})
```

## From a callback

Sometimes you have to work with APIs that don't support `async/await` or `Promise` and instead use the callback style.
To handle callback-based APIs, Effect provides the `Effect.async` constructor.

For example, let's wrap the `readFile` async API from the Node.js `fs` module with Effect (ensure you have `@types/node` installed):

```ts twoslash
// @types: node
import { Effect } from "effect"
import * as NodeFS from "node:fs"

const program = Effect.async<never, Error, Buffer>((resume) => {
  NodeFS.readFile("todos.txt", (error, data) => {
    if (error) {
      resume(Effect.fail(error))
    } else {
      resume(Effect.succeed(data))
    }
  })
})
```

In the above example, we manually annotate the types when calling `Effect.async` because TypeScript cannot infer the type parameters for a callback
based on the return value inside the callback body. Annotating the types ensures that the values provided to `resume` match the expected types.

<Idea>
  You can seamlessly mix synchronous and asynchronous code within the Effect
  framework. Everything becomes an Effect, enabling you to handle different
  types of side effects in a unified way.
</Idea>

## Suspended Effects

`Effect.suspend` is used to delay the creation of an effect.
It allows you to defer the evaluation of an effect until it is actually needed.
The `Effect.suspend` function takes a thunk that represents the effect, and it wraps it in a suspended effect.

```ts
const suspendedEffect = Effect.suspend(() => effect)
```

Let's explore some common scenarios where `Effect.suspend` proves useful:

1. **Lazy Evaluation**. When you want to defer the evaluation of an effect until it is required. This can be useful for optimizing the execution of effects, especially when they are not always needed or when their computation is expensive.

   Also, when effects with side effects or scoped captures are created, use `Effect.suspend` to re-execute on each invocation.

   ```ts twoslash
   import { Effect } from "effect"

   let i = 0

   const bad = Effect.succeed(i++)

   const good = Effect.suspend(() => Effect.succeed(i++))

   console.log(Effect.runSync(bad)) // Output: 0
   console.log(Effect.runSync(bad)) // Output: 0

   console.log(Effect.runSync(good)) // Output: 1
   console.log(Effect.runSync(good)) // Output: 2
   ```

   In this example, `Effect.succeed(i++)` creates a new numeric value and consistently returns the same number. On the other hand, `Effect.suspend(() => Effect.succeed(i++))` generates a new number with each invocation.

   This example utilizes `Effect.runSync` to execute effects and display their results (refer to [Running Effects](./running-effects##runsync) for more details).

2. **Handling Circular Dependencies**. `Effect.suspend` is helpful in managing circular dependencies between effects, where one effect depends on another, and vice versa.
   For example it's fairly common for `Effect.suspend` to be used in recursive functions to escape an eager call. For instance:

   ```ts twoslash
   import { Effect } from "effect"

   const blowsUp = (n: number): Effect.Effect<never, never, number> =>
     n < 2
       ? Effect.succeed(1)
       : Effect.zipWith(blowsUp(n - 1), blowsUp(n - 2), (a, b) => a + b)

   // console.log(Effect.runSync(blowsUp(32))) // crash: JavaScript heap out of memory

   const allGood = (n: number): Effect.Effect<never, never, number> =>
     n < 2
       ? Effect.succeed(1)
       : Effect.zipWith(
           Effect.suspend(() => allGood(n - 1)),
           Effect.suspend(() => allGood(n - 2)),
           (a, b) => a + b
         )

   console.log(Effect.runSync(allGood(32))) // Output: 3524578
   ```

3. **Unifying Return Type**. In situations where TypeScript struggles to unify the returned effect type, `Effect.suspend` can be employed to resolve this issue. For example:

   ```ts twoslash
   import { Effect } from "effect"

   const ugly = (a: number, b: number) =>
     b === 0
       ? Effect.fail(new Error("Cannot divide by zero"))
       : Effect.succeed(a / b)

   const nice = (a: number, b: number) =>
     Effect.suspend(() =>
       b === 0
         ? Effect.fail(new Error("Cannot divide by zero"))
         : Effect.succeed(a / b)
     )
   ```

## Cheatsheet

The table provides a summary of the available constructors, along with their input and output types, allowing you to choose the appropriate function based on your needs.

| **Function**            | **Given**                               | **To**                               |
| ----------------------- | --------------------------------------- | ------------------------------------ |
| `succeed`               | `A`                                     | `Effect<never, never, A>`            |
| `fail`                  | `E`                                     | `Effect<never, E, never>`            |
| `sync`                  | `() => A`                               | `Effect<never, never, A>`            |
| `try`                   | `() => A`                               | `Effect<never, UnknownException, A>` |
| `try` (overload)        | `() => A`, `unknown => E`               | `Effect<never, E, A>`                |
| `promise`               | `() => Promise<A>`                      | `Effect<never, never, A>`            |
| `tryPromise`            | `() => Promise<A>`                      | `Effect<never, UnknownException, A>` |
| `tryPromise` (overload) | `() => Promise<A>`, `unknown => E`      | `Effect<never, E, A>`                |
| `async`                 | `(Effect<never, E, A> => void) => void` | `Effect<never, E, A>`                |
| `suspend`               | `() => Effect<R, E, A>`                 | `Effect<R, E, A>`                    |

You can find the complete list of constructors [here](https://effect-ts.github.io/effect/effect/Effect.ts.html#constructors).

Now that we know how to create effects, it's time to learn how to run them.
Check out the next guide on [Running Effects](running-effects) to find out more.
