content/docs/400-guides/550-scheduling/200-repetition.mdx, before:

---
title: Repetition
excerpt: Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet, consetetur sadipscing elitr, sed diam nonumy eirmod tempor invidunt ut labore.
bottomNavigation: pagination
---

Repetition is a common requirement when working with effects in software development. It allows us to perform an effect multiple times according to a specific repetition policy.

Repeat policies are used in the following functions:

- `repeat`: Repeats an effect until the schedule is done.
- `repeatOrElse`: Repeats an effect until the schedule is done, with a fallback for errors.

<Warning>
  Scheduled recurrences are in addition to the first execution, so that
  `repeat(effect, Schedule.once)` yields an effect that executes `effect`, and
  then if that succeeds, executes `effect` an additional time.
</Warning>

## repeat

The basic syntax of `repeat` is as follows:

```ts
Effect.repeat(action, policy)
```

**Example**

```ts twoslash
import { Effect, Schedule, Console } from "effect"

const action = Console.log("success")

const policy = Schedule.addDelay(
  Schedule.recurs(2), // Repeat for a maximum of 2 times
  () => "100 millis" // Add a delay of 100 milliseconds between repetitions
)

const program = Effect.repeat(action, policy)

Effect.runPromise(program).then((n) => console.log(`repetitions: ${n}`))
/*
Output:
success
success
success
repetitions: 2
*/
```

## repeatOrElse

There is another version of `repeat` that helps us to have a fallback strategy in case of erros,
if something goes wrong we can handle that by using the `Effect.repeatOrElse` function,
which helps up to add an `orElse` callback that will run in case of repetition failure.

The basic syntax of `repeatOrElse` is as follows:

```ts
Effect.repeatOrElse(action, policy, fallback)
```

**Example**

```ts twoslash
import { Effect, Schedule } from "effect"

let count = 0

// Define an async effect that simulates an action with possible failures
const action = Effect.async<never, Error, string>((resume) => {
  if (count > 1) {
    console.log("failure")
    resume(Effect.fail(new Error()))
  } else {
    count++
    console.log("success")
    resume(Effect.succeed("yay!"))
  }
})

const policy = Schedule.addDelay(
  Schedule.recurs(2), // Repeat for a maximum of 2 times
  () => "100 millis" // Add a delay of 100 milliseconds between repetitions
)

const program = Effect.repeatOrElse(action, policy, () =>
  Effect.sync(() => {
    console.log("orElse")
    return count - 1
  })
)

Effect.runPromise(program).then((n) => console.log(`repetitions: ${n}`))
/*
Output:
success
success
failure
orElse
repetitions: 1
*/
```

Commit message:

replace excerpt placeholders with actual content (index pages excluded) (#424)

content/docs/400-guides/550-scheduling/200-repetition.mdx, after:

---
title: Repetition
excerpt: Discover the significance of repetition in effect-driven software development with functions like `repeat` and `repeatOrElse`. Explore repeat policies, which enable you to execute effects multiple times according to specific criteria. Learn the syntax and examples of `repeat` and `repeatOrElse` for effective handling of repeated actions, including optional fallback strategies for errors.
bottomNavigation: pagination
---

Repetition is a common requirement when working with effects in software development. It allows us to perform an effect multiple times according to a specific repetition policy.

Repeat policies are used in the following functions:

- `repeat`: Repeats an effect until the schedule is done.
- `repeatOrElse`: Repeats an effect until the schedule is done, with a fallback for errors.

<Warning>
  Scheduled recurrences are in addition to the first execution, so that
  `repeat(effect, Schedule.once)` yields an effect that executes `effect`, and
  then if that succeeds, executes `effect` an additional time.
</Warning>

## repeat

The basic syntax of `repeat` is as follows:

```ts
Effect.repeat(action, policy)
```

**Example**

```ts twoslash
import { Effect, Schedule, Console } from "effect"

const action = Console.log("success")

const policy = Schedule.addDelay(
  Schedule.recurs(2), // Repeat for a maximum of 2 times
  () => "100 millis" // Add a delay of 100 milliseconds between repetitions
)

const program = Effect.repeat(action, policy)

Effect.runPromise(program).then((n) => console.log(`repetitions: ${n}`))
/*
Output:
success
success
success
repetitions: 2
*/
```

## repeatOrElse

There is another version of `repeat` that helps us to have a fallback strategy in case of erros,
if something goes wrong we can handle that by using the `Effect.repeatOrElse` function,
which helps up to add an `orElse` callback that will run in case of repetition failure.

The basic syntax of `repeatOrElse` is as follows:

```ts
Effect.repeatOrElse(action, policy, fallback)
```

**Example**

```ts twoslash
import { Effect, Schedule } from "effect"

let count = 0

// Define an async effect that simulates an action with possible failures
const action = Effect.async<never, Error, string>((resume) => {
  if (count > 1) {
    console.log("failure")
    resume(Effect.fail(new Error()))
  } else {
    count++
    console.log("success")
    resume(Effect.succeed("yay!"))
  }
})

const policy = Schedule.addDelay(
  Schedule.recurs(2), // Repeat for a maximum of 2 times
  () => "100 millis" // Add a delay of 100 milliseconds between repetitions
)

const program = Effect.repeatOrElse(action, policy, () =>
  Effect.sync(() => {
    console.log("orElse")
    return count - 1
  })
)

Effect.runPromise(program).then((n) => console.log(`repetitions: ${n}`))
/*
Output:
success
success
failure
orElse
repetitions: 1
*/
```
