content/docs/400-guides/550-scheduling/300-built-in-schedules.mdx, before:

---
title: Built-in Schedules
excerpt: Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet, consetetur sadipscing elitr, sed diam nonumy eirmod tempor invidunt ut labore.
bottomNavigation: pagination
---

To demonstrate the functionality of different schedules, we will be working with the following helper:

```twoslash include Delay
import { Effect } from "effect"

let start = new Date().getTime()

export const log = Effect.sync(() => {
  const now = new Date().getTime()
  console.log(`delay: ${now - start}`)
  start = now
})
```

```ts filename="Delay.ts" twoslash
// @include: Delay
```

The `log` helper logs the time delay between each execution. We will use this helper to showcase the behavior of various built-in schedules.

## forever

A schedule that always recurs and produces number of recurrence at each run.

```ts twoslash
// @filename: Delay.ts
// @include: Delay

// @filename: index.ts
// ---cut---
import { Effect, Schedule } from "effect"
import * as Delay from "./Delay"

const schedule = Schedule.forever

Effect.runPromise(Effect.repeat(Delay.log, schedule))
/*
Output:
delay: 3
delay: 7 < forever
delay: 5
delay: 1
delay: 1
delay: 1
delay: 1
delay: 1
...
*/
```

## once

A schedule that recurs one time.

```ts twoslash
// @filename: Delay.ts
// @include: Delay

// @filename: index.ts
// ---cut---
import { Effect, Schedule } from "effect"
import * as Delay from "./Delay"

const schedule = Schedule.once

Effect.runPromise(Effect.repeat(Delay.log, schedule))
/*
Output:
delay: 3
delay: 8 < once
*/
```

## recurs

A schedule that only recurs the specified number of times.

```ts twoslash
// @filename: Delay.ts
// @include: Delay

// @filename: index.ts
// ---cut---
import { Effect, Schedule } from "effect"
import * as Delay from "./Delay"

const schedule = Schedule.recurs(5)

Effect.runPromise(Effect.repeat(Delay.log, schedule))
/*
Output:
delay: 5
delay: 8 < recurs
delay: 6
delay: 2
delay: 1
delay: 1
*/
```

## Recurring at specific intervals

In the context of scheduling, two commonly used schedules are `spaced` and `fixed`. While they both involve recurring at specific intervals, they have a fundamental difference in how they determine the timing of repetitions.

The `spaced` schedule creates a recurring pattern where each repetition is spaced apart by a specified duration. This means that there is a delay between the completion of one repetition and the start of the next. The duration between repetitions remains constant, providing a consistent spacing pattern.

On the other hand, the `fixed` schedule recurs on a fixed interval, regardless of the duration of the actions or the completion time of previous repetitions. It operates independently of the execution time, ensuring a regular recurrence at the specified interval.

### spaced

A schedule that recurs continuously, each repetition spaced the specified duration from the last run.

```ts twoslash
// @filename: Delay.ts
// @include: Delay

// @filename: index.ts
// ---cut---
import { Effect, Schedule } from "effect"
import * as Delay from "./Delay"

const schedule = Schedule.spaced("200 millis")

const action = Effect.delay(Delay.log, "100 millis")

Effect.runPromise(Effect.repeat(action, schedule))
/*
Output:
delay: 109
delay: 316 < spaced
delay: 302
delay: 306
delay: 306
...
*/
```

The first delay is approximately 100 milliseconds, as the initial execution is not affected by the schedule. Subsequent delays are approximately 200 milliseconds apart, demonstrating the effect of the `spaced` schedule.

### fixed

A schedule that recurs on a fixed interval. Returns the number of repetitions of the schedule so far.

```ts twoslash
// @filename: Delay.ts
// @include: Delay

// @filename: index.ts
// ---cut---
import { Effect, Schedule } from "effect"
import * as Delay from "./Delay"

const schedule = Schedule.fixed("200 millis")

const action = Effect.delay(Delay.log, "100 millis")

Effect.runPromise(Effect.repeat(action, schedule))
/*
Output:
delay: 109
delay: 316 < fixed
delay: 202
delay: 202
delay: 203
...
*/
```

The first delay is approximately 100 milliseconds, as the initial execution is not affected by the schedule. Subsequent delays are consistently around 200 milliseconds apart, demonstrating the effect of the `fixed` schedule.

## exponential

A schedule that recurs using exponential backoff

```ts twoslash
// @filename: Delay.ts
// @include: Delay

// @filename: index.ts
// ---cut---
import { Effect, Schedule } from "effect"
import * as Delay from "./Delay"

const schedule = Schedule.exponential("10 millis")

Effect.runPromise(Effect.repeat(Delay.log, schedule))
/*
Output:
delay: 4
delay: 17 < exponential
delay: 21
delay: 40
delay: 85
delay: 168
delay: 324
delay: 644
delay: 1287
...
*/
```

## fibonacci

A schedule that always recurs, increasing delays by summing the preceding two delays (similar to the fibonacci sequence). Returns the current duration between recurrences.

```ts twoslash
// @filename: Delay.ts
// @include: Delay

// @filename: index.ts
// ---cut---
import { Effect, Schedule } from "effect"
import * as Delay from "./Delay"

const schedule = Schedule.fibonacci("10 millis")

Effect.runPromise(Effect.repeat(Delay.log, schedule))
/*
Output:
delay: 3
delay: 17 < fibonacci
delay: 11
delay: 23
delay: 32
delay: 52
delay: 84
delay: 132
delay: 212
delay: 342
delay: 556
delay: 892
...
*/
```

Commit message:

replace excerpt placeholders with actual content (index pages excluded)

content/docs/400-guides/550-scheduling/300-built-in-schedules.mdx, after:

---
title: Built-in Schedules
excerpt: Unlock the power of scheduling in Effect with built-in schedules. Dive into various schedules like `forever`, `once`, and `recurs`, each offering unique recurrence patterns. Witness the behavior of `spaced` and `fixed` schedules, understanding how they space repetitions at specific intervals. Delve into advanced schedules like `exponential` and `fibonacci`, providing controlled recurrence with increasing delays. Master the art of scheduling for precise and efficient execution of effectful operations.
bottomNavigation: pagination
---

To demonstrate the functionality of different schedules, we will be working with the following helper:

```twoslash include Delay
import { Effect } from "effect"

let start = new Date().getTime()

export const log = Effect.sync(() => {
  const now = new Date().getTime()
  console.log(`delay: ${now - start}`)
  start = now
})
```

```ts filename="Delay.ts" twoslash
// @include: Delay
```

The `log` helper logs the time delay between each execution. We will use this helper to showcase the behavior of various built-in schedules.

## forever

A schedule that always recurs and produces number of recurrence at each run.

```ts twoslash
// @filename: Delay.ts
// @include: Delay

// @filename: index.ts
// ---cut---
import { Effect, Schedule } from "effect"
import * as Delay from "./Delay"

const schedule = Schedule.forever

Effect.runPromise(Effect.repeat(Delay.log, schedule))
/*
Output:
delay: 3
delay: 7 < forever
delay: 5
delay: 1
delay: 1
delay: 1
delay: 1
delay: 1
...
*/
```

## once

A schedule that recurs one time.

```ts twoslash
// @filename: Delay.ts
// @include: Delay

// @filename: index.ts
// ---cut---
import { Effect, Schedule } from "effect"
import * as Delay from "./Delay"

const schedule = Schedule.once

Effect.runPromise(Effect.repeat(Delay.log, schedule))
/*
Output:
delay: 3
delay: 8 < once
*/
```

## recurs

A schedule that only recurs the specified number of times.

```ts twoslash
// @filename: Delay.ts
// @include: Delay

// @filename: index.ts
// ---cut---
import { Effect, Schedule } from "effect"
import * as Delay from "./Delay"

const schedule = Schedule.recurs(5)

Effect.runPromise(Effect.repeat(Delay.log, schedule))
/*
Output:
delay: 5
delay: 8 < recurs
delay: 6
delay: 2
delay: 1
delay: 1
*/
```

## Recurring at specific intervals

In the context of scheduling, two commonly used schedules are `spaced` and `fixed`. While they both involve recurring at specific intervals, they have a fundamental difference in how they determine the timing of repetitions.

The `spaced` schedule creates a recurring pattern where each repetition is spaced apart by a specified duration. This means that there is a delay between the completion of one repetition and the start of the next. The duration between repetitions remains constant, providing a consistent spacing pattern.

On the other hand, the `fixed` schedule recurs on a fixed interval, regardless of the duration of the actions or the completion time of previous repetitions. It operates independently of the execution time, ensuring a regular recurrence at the specified interval.

### spaced

A schedule that recurs continuously, each repetition spaced the specified duration from the last run.

```ts twoslash
// @filename: Delay.ts
// @include: Delay

// @filename: index.ts
// ---cut---
import { Effect, Schedule } from "effect"
import * as Delay from "./Delay"

const schedule = Schedule.spaced("200 millis")

const action = Effect.delay(Delay.log, "100 millis")

Effect.runPromise(Effect.repeat(action, schedule))
/*
Output:
delay: 109
delay: 316 < spaced
delay: 302
delay: 306
delay: 306
...
*/
```

The first delay is approximately 100 milliseconds, as the initial execution is not affected by the schedule. Subsequent delays are approximately 200 milliseconds apart, demonstrating the effect of the `spaced` schedule.

### fixed

A schedule that recurs on a fixed interval. Returns the number of repetitions of the schedule so far.

```ts twoslash
// @filename: Delay.ts
// @include: Delay

// @filename: index.ts
// ---cut---
import { Effect, Schedule } from "effect"
import * as Delay from "./Delay"

const schedule = Schedule.fixed("200 millis")

const action = Effect.delay(Delay.log, "100 millis")

Effect.runPromise(Effect.repeat(action, schedule))
/*
Output:
delay: 109
delay: 316 < fixed
delay: 202
delay: 202
delay: 203
...
*/
```

The first delay is approximately 100 milliseconds, as the initial execution is not affected by the schedule. Subsequent delays are consistently around 200 milliseconds apart, demonstrating the effect of the `fixed` schedule.

## exponential

A schedule that recurs using exponential backoff

```ts twoslash
// @filename: Delay.ts
// @include: Delay

// @filename: index.ts
// ---cut---
import { Effect, Schedule } from "effect"
import * as Delay from "./Delay"

const schedule = Schedule.exponential("10 millis")

Effect.runPromise(Effect.repeat(Delay.log, schedule))
/*
Output:
delay: 4
delay: 17 < exponential
delay: 21
delay: 40
delay: 85
delay: 168
delay: 324
delay: 644
delay: 1287
...
*/
```

## fibonacci

A schedule that always recurs, increasing delays by summing the preceding two delays (similar to the fibonacci sequence). Returns the current duration between recurrences.

```ts twoslash
// @filename: Delay.ts
// @include: Delay

// @filename: index.ts
// ---cut---
import { Effect, Schedule } from "effect"
import * as Delay from "./Delay"

const schedule = Schedule.fibonacci("10 millis")

Effect.runPromise(Effect.repeat(Delay.log, schedule))
/*
Output:
delay: 3
delay: 17 < fibonacci
delay: 11
delay: 23
delay: 32
delay: 52
delay: 84
delay: 132
delay: 212
delay: 342
delay: 556
delay: 892
...
*/
```
