pages/docs/control-flow.mdx, before:

# Introduction to Effect's Control Flow Operators

Even though JavaScript provides built-in control flow structures, Effect offers additional control flow operators that are useful in Effect applications. In this section, we will introduce different ways to control the flow of execution.

## `if` Expression

When working with Effect values, we can use the standard JavaScript if-then-else expressions:

```ts file=<rootDir>/src/guide/control-flow/if-expression.ts

```

Here we are using the [`Option`](./data-types/option) data type to represent the absence of a valid value.

We can also handle invalid inputs by using the error channel:

```ts file=<rootDir>/src/guide/control-flow/if-expression-error-channel.ts

```

## Conditional Operators

### when

Instead of using `if (condition) expression`, we can use the `Effect.when` operator:

```ts file=<rootDir>/src/guide/control-flow/when.ts

```

If the condition itself involves an effect, we can use `Effect.whenEffect`.

For example, the following function creates a random option of an integer value:

```ts file=<rootDir>/src/guide/control-flow/whenEffect.ts

```

The `Effect.when` and `Effect.whenEffect` operators allow us to conditionally execute effects based on a given predicate or an effectful predicate, respectively.

### unless

The `Effect.unless` and `Effect.unlessEffect` operators are similar to the `when*` operators, but they are equivalent to the `if (!condition) expression` construct.

### if

The `Effect.if` operator allows you to provide an effectful predicate. If the predicate evaluates to `true`, the `onTrue` effect will be executed. Otherwise, the `onFalse` effect will be executed.

Let's use this operator to create a simple virtual coin flip function:

```ts file=<rootDir>/src/guide/control-flow/if.ts

```

In this example, we generate a random boolean value using `Random.nextBoolean`. If the value is `true`, the effect `onTrue` will be executed, which logs "Head". Otherwise, if the value is `false`, the effect `onFalse` will be executed, logging "Tail".

## Loop Operators

### loop

The `Effect.loop` operator allows you to repeatedly change the state based on an `step` function until a condition given by the `cont` function is evaluated to `true`:

```ts
Effect.loop(initial, options: { while, step, body })
```

It collects all intermediate states in an array and returns it as the final result.

We can think of `Effect.loop` as equivalent to a `while` loop in JavaScript:

```ts
let state = initial
const result = []

while (options.while(state)) {
  result.push(options.body(state))
  state = options.step(state)
}

return result
```

**Example**

```ts file=<rootDir>/src/guide/control-flow/loop.ts

```

In this example, the loop starts with an initial state of `1`. The loop continues as long as the condition `n <= 5` is `true`, and in each iteration, the state `n` is incremented by `1`. The effect `Effect.succeed(n)` is performed on each iteration, collecting all intermediate states in an array.

You can also use the `discard` option if you're not interested in collecting the intermediate results. It discards all intermediate states and returns `undefined` as the final result.

**Example** (`discard: true`)

```ts file=<rootDir>/src/guide/control-flow/loop-discard.ts

```

In this example, the loop performs a side effect of logging the current index on each iteration, but it discards all intermediate results. The final result is `undefined`.

### iterate

The `Effect.iterate` combinator allows you to iterate with an effectful operation. It uses an effectful `body` operation to change the state during each iteration and continues the iteration as long as the `cont` function evaluates to `true`.

```ts
Effect.iterate(initial, options: { while, body })
```

We can think of `Effect.iterate` as equivalent to a `while` loop in JavaScript:

```ts
let result = initial

while (options.while(result)) {
  result = options.body(result)
}

return result
```

Here's an example of how it works:

```ts file=<rootDir>/src/guide/control-flow/iterate.ts

```

### forEach

The `Effect.forEach` combinator allows you to iterate over an `Iterable` and perform an effectful operation for each element.
It applies the given effectful operation to each element of the `Iterable` sequentially.

Let's take a look at an example:

```ts file=<rootDir>/src/guide/control-flow/forEach.ts

```

In this example, we have an array `[1, 2, 3, 4, 5]`, and for each element `index`, we perform an effectful operation. The output shows that the operation is executed for each element in the array, displaying the current index.

The `Effect.forEach` combinator collects the results of each effectful operation in an array, which is why the final output is `[ 2, 4, 6, 8, 10 ]`.

We also have the `discard` option, which when set to `true` discards the results of each effectful operation:

```ts file=<rootDir>/src/guide/control-flow/forEach-discard.ts

```

In this case, the output is the same, but the final result is `undefined` since the results of each effectful operation are discarded.

Commit message:

refactor Introduction to Effect's Control Flow Operators

pages/docs/control-flow.mdx, after:

# Introduction to Effect's Control Flow Operators

Even though JavaScript provides built-in control flow structures, Effect offers additional control flow functions that are useful in Effect applications. In this section, we will introduce different ways to control the flow of execution.

## `if` Expression

When working with Effect values, we can use the standard JavaScript if-then-else expressions:

```ts file=<rootDir>/src/guide/control-flow/if-expression.ts

```

Here we are using the [`Option`](./data-types/option) data type to represent the absence of a valid value.

We can also handle invalid inputs by using the error channel:

```ts file=<rootDir>/src/guide/control-flow/if-expression-error-channel.ts

```

## Conditional Operators

### when

Instead of using `if (condition) expression`, we can use the `Effect.when` function:

```ts file=<rootDir>/src/guide/control-flow/when.ts#L1-L6

```

Here we are using the [`Option`](./data-types/option) data type to represent the absence of a valid value.

If the condition evaluates to `true`, the effect inside the `Effect.when` will be executed and the result will be wrapped in a `Some`, otherwise it returns `None`:

```ts file=<rootDir>/src/guide/control-flow/when.ts#L8-

```

If the condition itself involves an effect, we can use `Effect.whenEffect`.

For example, the following function creates a random option of an integer value:

```ts file=<rootDir>/src/guide/control-flow/whenEffect.ts

```

### unless

The `Effect.unless` and `Effect.unlessEffect` functions are similar to the `when*` functions, but they are equivalent to the `if (!condition) expression` construct.

### if

The `Effect.if` function allows you to provide an effectful predicate. If the predicate evaluates to `true`, the `onTrue` effect will be executed. Otherwise, the `onFalse` effect will be executed.

Let's use this function to create a simple virtual coin flip function:

```ts file=<rootDir>/src/guide/control-flow/if.ts

```

In this example, we generate a random boolean value using `Random.nextBoolean`. If the value is `true`, the effect `onTrue` will be executed, which logs "Head". Otherwise, if the value is `false`, the effect `onFalse` will be executed, logging "Tail".

## Loop Operators

### loop

The `Effect.loop` function allows you to repeatedly change the state based on an `step` function until a condition given by the `cont` function is evaluated to `true`:

```ts
Effect.loop(initial, options: { while, step, body })
```

It collects all intermediate states in an array and returns it as the final result.

We can think of `Effect.loop` as equivalent to a `while` loop in JavaScript:

```ts
let state = initial
const result = []

while (options.while(state)) {
  result.push(options.body(state))
  state = options.step(state)
}

return result
```

**Example**

```ts file=<rootDir>/src/guide/control-flow/loop.ts

```

In this example, the loop starts with an initial state of `1`. The loop continues as long as the condition `n <= 5` is `true`, and in each iteration, the state `n` is incremented by `1`. The effect `Effect.succeed(n)` is performed on each iteration, collecting all intermediate states in an array.

You can also use the `discard` option if you're not interested in collecting the intermediate results. It discards all intermediate states and returns `undefined` as the final result.

**Example** (`discard: true`)

```ts file=<rootDir>/src/guide/control-flow/loop-discard.ts

```

In this example, the loop performs a side effect of logging the current index on each iteration, but it discards all intermediate results. The final result is `undefined`.

### iterate

The `Effect.iterate` combinator allows you to iterate with an effectful operation. It uses an effectful `body` operation to change the state during each iteration and continues the iteration as long as the `cont` function evaluates to `true`.

```ts
Effect.iterate(initial, options: { while, body })
```

We can think of `Effect.iterate` as equivalent to a `while` loop in JavaScript:

```ts
let result = initial

while (options.while(result)) {
  result = options.body(result)
}

return result
```

Here's an example of how it works:

```ts file=<rootDir>/src/guide/control-flow/iterate.ts

```

### forEach

The `Effect.forEach` combinator allows you to iterate over an `Iterable` and perform an effectful operation for each element.
It applies the given effectful operation to each element of the `Iterable` sequentially.

Let's take a look at an example:

```ts file=<rootDir>/src/guide/control-flow/forEach.ts

```

In this example, we have an array `[1, 2, 3, 4, 5]`, and for each element we perform an effectful operation. The output shows that the operation is executed for each element in the array, displaying the current index.

The `Effect.forEach` combinator collects the results of each effectful operation in an array, which is why the final output is `[ 2, 4, 6, 8, 10 ]`.

We also have the `discard` option, which when set to `true` discards the results of each effectful operation:

```ts file=<rootDir>/src/guide/control-flow/forEach-discard.ts

```

In this case, the output is the same, but the final result is `undefined` since the results of each effectful operation are discarded.
