pages/index.mdx, before:

# Welcome to Effect

Effect is a powerful TypeScript library designed to help developers
easily create complex, synchronous, and asynchronous programs.

One of the key features that sets Effect apart is how it leverages
[structured concurrency](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Structured_concurrency)
to provide features such as async cancellation and safe resource management, making it easier to build robust, scalable, and efficient programs.

<div style={{ textAlign: "center", padding: "60px" }}>
  <a
    href="docs/quickstart"
    style={{
      backgroundColor: "rgb(90, 103, 216)",
      color: "#ffffff",
      fontSize: "20px",
      padding: "20px",
      borderRadius: "6px",
    }}
  >
    <b>Quickstart</b>
  </a>
</div>

Some of the main Effect features include:

| **Feature**         | **Description**                                                                                                    |
| ------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ |
| **Concurrency**     | Achieve highly-scalable, ultra low-latency applications through Effect's fiber-based concurrency model.            |
| **Composability**   | Construct highly maintainable, readable, and flexible software through the use of small, reusable building blocks. |
| **Resource Safety** | Safely manage acquisition and release of resources, even when your program fails.                                  |
| **Type Safety**     | Leverage the TypeScript type system to the fullest with Effect's focus on type inference and type safety.          |
| **Asynchronicity**  | Write code that looks the same, whether it is synchronous or asynchronous.                                         |
| **Observability**   | With full tracing capabilities, you can easily debug and monitor the execution of your Effect program.             |

We are working hard to create comprehensive and approachable [documentation](docs/introduction)
that will guide you through various aspects of using Effect. We hope that
you will find what you are looking for here - but if you don't, reach out
to us on [Discord](https://discord.gg/effect-ts) or [Twitter](https://twitter.com/EffectTS_)!

Commit message:

add Error Handling to Main Features

pages/index.mdx, after:

# Welcome to Effect

Effect is a powerful TypeScript library designed to help developers
easily create complex, synchronous, and asynchronous programs.

One of the key features that sets Effect apart is how it leverages
[structured concurrency](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Structured_concurrency)
to provide features such as async cancellation and safe resource management, making it easier to build robust, scalable, and efficient programs.

<div style={{ textAlign: "center", padding: "60px" }}>
  <a
    href="docs/quickstart"
    style={{
      backgroundColor: "rgb(90, 103, 216)",
      color: "#ffffff",
      fontSize: "20px",
      padding: "20px",
      borderRadius: "6px",
    }}
  >
    <b>Quickstart</b>
  </a>
</div>

Some of the main Effect features include:

| **Feature**         | **Description**                                                                                                    |
| ------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ |
| **Concurrency**     | Achieve highly-scalable, ultra low-latency applications through Effect's fiber-based concurrency model.            |
| **Composability**   | Construct highly maintainable, readable, and flexible software through the use of small, reusable building blocks. |
| **Resource Safety** | Safely manage acquisition and release of resources, even when your program fails.                                  |
| **Type Safety**     | Leverage the TypeScript type system to the fullest with Effect's focus on type inference and type safety.          |
| **Error Handling**  | Handle errors in a structured and reliable manner using Effect's built-in error handling capabilities.             |
| **Asynchronicity**  | Write code that looks the same, whether it is synchronous or asynchronous.                                         |
| **Observability**   | With full tracing capabilities, you can easily debug and monitor the execution of your Effect program.             |

We are working hard to create comprehensive and approachable [documentation](docs/introduction)
that will guide you through various aspects of using Effect. We hope that
you will find what you are looking for here - but if you don't, reach out
to us on [Discord](https://discord.gg/effect-ts) or [Twitter](https://twitter.com/EffectTS_)!
