pages/docs/essentials/using-generators.mdx, before:

import { Info, Warning, Idea } from "@/components/Callout"
import { Tabs, Tab, CustomTabs } from "@/components/Code"

# Using Generators in Effect

In the [previous section](pipeline) , we learned how to build pipelines using the `pipe` function. However, Effect provides an alternative approach for writing effectful code: using [generators](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Generator).

<Idea>
  The use of generators is an **optional feature** in Effect. If you find
  generators unfamiliar or prefer a different coding style, you can continue
  using APIs like `Effect.flatMap` and `Effect.map` to compose your effects
  using the `pipe` function. Effect provides flexibility, allowing you to choose
  the approach that suits your coding preferences and project requirements.
</Idea>

Let's rewrite the pipeline we created in the previous section using the `Effect.gen` helper:

<Tabs>
<Tab>

```ts file=<rootDir>/src/essentials/using-generators/pipeline-gen.ts

```

</Tab>
<Tab>

```ts file=<rootDir>/src/essentials/using-generators/pipeline-pipe.ts

```

</Tab>
</Tabs>

<Warning>
  The generator API is only available when using the `downlevelIteration` flag
  or with a `target` of `"es2015"` or higher in your `tsconfig.json` file
</Warning>

When working with generators in Effect, the `_` helper plays a crucial role when yielding an effect. By passing the effect you want to yield to the `_` function

```ts /Effect.all([Effect.succeed(10), Effect.succeed(2)])/ /divide(a, b)/ file=<rootDir>/src/essentials/using-generators/pipeline-gen.ts#L11-L13

```

TypeScript can accurately infer the types associated with that effect. This ensures that your code is type-safe and helps prevent potential errors.

Additionally, the `_` function acts as an adapter between Effect and the JavaScript world, particularly the [iterable protocol](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Iteration_protocols). This adapter allows you to seamlessly leverage the [`yield*`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Operators/yield*) keyword from JavaScript's generator syntax within Effect's generator functions.

<Info>
  The `_` symbol is just a convention for the argument name and is not a special
  symbol in Effect. You are free to use any name you prefer (e.g., `$`, etc...).
  The current convention is to use `_` as the argument name.
</Info>

## Comparing Effect.gen with async/await

If you are familiar with `async`/`await`, you may notice that the flow of writing code is similar.

Let's compare the two approaches:

<CustomTabs items={['Using Effect.gen', 'Using async / await']}>
  <Tab>

```ts file=<rootDir>/src/essentials/using-generators/pipeline-gen.ts#L3-

```

  </Tab>
  <Tab>

```ts file=<rootDir>/src/essentials/using-generators/pipeline-async-await.ts

```

  </Tab>
</CustomTabs>

It's important to note that although the code appears similar, the two programs are not identical. The purpose of comparing them side by side is just to highlight the resemblance in how they are written.

<Idea>
  One benefit of using `Effect.gen` with generators is that it allows you to use
  normal control flow constructs like `if`/`else`, `while`, and other branching
  and looping constructs within the generator function. This can provide more
  flexibility in expressing complex control flow logic within your code.
</Idea>

## Using the helper as a `pipe`

The `_` helper can also be used as a `pipe` function, allowing you to mix and match different styles of writing code within `Effect.gen` if needed.

In the following example, the `Random.next()` effect is piped into the `Effect.map` function:

```ts {5-6} file=<rootDir>/src/essentials/using-generators/helper-as-pipe.ts

```

This approach is useful to avoid excessive notation by using both the `_` helper and the `pipe` function. Instead, you can directly pass the `Random.next()` effect to `Effect.map` within the `_` helper, eliminating the need for an additional `pipe` function:

```ts /pipe/ file=<rootDir>/src/essentials/using-generators/helper-as-pipe-redundant-pipe.ts#L3-
const program = Effect.gen(function* (_) {
  const n = yield* _(
    pipe(
      Random.next,
      Effect.map((n) => n * 2)
    )
  )
  // ...
})
```

Commit message:

Switching order of pipeline and generators

pages/docs/essentials/using-generators.mdx, after:

import { Info, Warning, Idea } from "@/components/Callout"
import { Tabs, Tab, CustomTabs } from "@/components/Code"

# Using Generators in Effect

In the previous sections, we learned how to [create](./creating) effects and [execute](./running) them. Now, it's time to write our first simple program.

Effect offers a convenient syntax, similar to `async`/`await`, to write effectful code using [generators](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Generator).

<Idea>
  The use of generators is an **optional feature** in Effect. If you find
  generators unfamiliar or prefer a different coding style, you can explore the
  documentation about [Building Pipelines](./pipeline) in Effect.
</Idea>

Let's start with a basic program that performs a series of transformations:

```ts file=<rootDir>/src/essentials/using-generators/first-program-gen.ts

```

<Warning>
  The generator API is only available when using the `downlevelIteration` flag
  or with a `target` of `"es2015"` or higher in your `tsconfig.json` file
</Warning>

When working with generators in Effect, the `_` helper plays a crucial role when yielding an effect.
By passing the effect you want to yield to the `_` function

```ts /task1/ /task2/ /divide(a, b)/ file=<rootDir>/src/essentials/using-generators/first-program-gen.ts#L16-L22

```

TypeScript can accurately infer the types associated with that effect. This ensures that your code is type-safe and helps prevent potential errors.

Additionally, the `_` function acts as an adapter between Effect and the JavaScript world, particularly the [iterable protocol](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Iteration_protocols). This adapter allows you to seamlessly leverage the [`yield*`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Operators/yield*) keyword from JavaScript's generator syntax within Effect's generator functions.

<Info>
  The `_` symbol is just a convention for the argument name and is not a special
  symbol in Effect. You are free to use any name you prefer (e.g., `$`, etc...).
  The current convention is to use `_` as the argument name.
</Info>

## Comparing Effect.gen with async/await

If you are familiar with `async`/`await`, you may notice that the flow of writing code is similar.

Let's compare the two approaches:

<CustomTabs items={['Using Effect.gen', 'Using async / await']}>
  <Tab>

```ts file=<rootDir>/src/essentials/using-generators/first-program-gen.ts#L3-

```

  </Tab>
  <Tab>

```ts file=<rootDir>/src/essentials/using-generators/first-program-async-await.ts

```

  </Tab>
</CustomTabs>

It's important to note that although the code appears similar, the two programs are not identical. The purpose of comparing them side by side is just to highlight the resemblance in how they are written.

<Idea>
  One benefit of using `Effect.gen` with generators is that it allows you to use
  normal control flow constructs like `if`/`else`, `while`, and other branching
  and looping constructs within the generator function. This can provide more
  flexibility in expressing complex control flow logic within your code.
</Idea>

## Using the helper as a `pipe`

The `_` helper can also be used as a `pipe` function (see [Building Pipelines](./pipeline) for more information), allowing you to mix and match different styles of writing code within `Effect.gen` if needed.

In the following example, the `Random.next()` effect is piped into the `Effect.map` function:

```ts {5-6} file=<rootDir>/src/essentials/using-generators/helper-as-pipe.ts

```

This approach is useful to avoid excessive notation by using both the `_` helper and the `pipe` function. Instead, you can directly pass the `Random.next()` effect to `Effect.map` within the `_` helper, eliminating the need for an additional `pipe` function:

```ts /pipe/ file=<rootDir>/src/essentials/using-generators/helper-as-pipe-redundant-pipe.ts#L3-
const program = Effect.gen(function* (_) {
  const n = yield* _(
    pipe(
      Random.next,
      Effect.map((n) => n * 2)
    )
  )
  // ...
})
```
