pages/docs/data-types/chunk.mdx, before:

import { Warning } from "@/components/Callout"

# Chunk

A `Chunk<A>` represents a chunk of values of type `A`.
Chunks are usually backed by arrays, but expose a purely functional, safe interface to the underlying elements, and they become lazy on operations that would be costly with arrays, such as repeated concatenation. Like lists and arrays, `Chunk` is an ordered collection.

## Why Chunk?

Let's explore the reasons behind using `Chunk`:

- **Immutability**: In JavaScript, there is no built-in immutable data type that can efficiently represent an array. While the `Array` type exists, it provides a mutable interface, which means it can be modified after creation. `Chunk`, on the other hand, is an immutable array-like data structure that ensures the data remains unchanged. Immutability is beneficial in various scenarios, especially when dealing with concurrent programming.

- **High Performance**: `Chunk` not only offers immutability but also delivers high performance. It provides specialized operations for common array manipulations, such as appending a single element or concatenating two `Chunk`s together. These specialized operations are significantly faster than performing the same operations on regular JavaScript arrays.

## Operations

### Creating

To create an empty `Chunk`, you can use the following code:

```ts
import * as Chunk from "@effect/data/Chunk"

// Chunk<never>
const emptyChunk = Chunk.empty()
```

If you want to create a `Chunk` with specific values, you can use the `Chunk.make(...values){:ts}` function:

```ts
import * as Chunk from "@effect/data/Chunk"

// NonEmptyChunk<number>
const nonEmptyChunk = Chunk.make(1, 2, 3)
```

Alternatively, you can create a `Chunk` by providing a collection of values. There are multiple ways to achieve this:

- Creating a `Chunk` from a generic `Iterable`:

  ```ts
  import * as Chunk from "@effect/data/Chunk"
  import * as List from "@effect/data/List"

  // Chunk<number>
  const fromArray = Chunk.fromIterable([1, 2, 3])

  // Chunk<number>
  const fromList = Chunk.fromIterable(List.make(1, 2, 3))
  ```

- Creating a `Chunk` from an `Array`:

  ```ts
  import * as Chunk from "@effect/data/Chunk"

  // Chunk<number>
  const fromUnsafeArray = Chunk.unsafeFromArray([1, 2, 3])
  ```

<Warning>
  It is important to note that using `unsafeFromArray` can potentially lead to
  unsafe or unexpected behavior if the input array is mutated after conversion.
  If you want to ensure safety, it is recommended to use `fromIterable`.
</Warning>

### Concatenating

You can concatenate two Chunks using the `concat` function:

```ts
import * as Chunk from "@effect/data/Chunk"

// Chunk<string | number>
const concatenatedChunk = Chunk.concat(Chunk.make(1, 2), Chunk.make("a", "b"))
```

### Dropping

To drop elements from the beginning of a `Chunk`, you can use the `drop` function:

```ts
import * as Chunk from "@effect/data/Chunk"

// Chunk<number>
const droppedChunk = Chunk.drop(Chunk.make(1, 2, 3, 4), 2) // Drops the first 2 elements from the Chunk
```

### Comparing

You can compare two `Chunk`s for equality using the `Equal.equals` function:

```ts
import * as Chunk from "@effect/data/Chunk"
import * as Equal from "@effect/data/Equal"

const chunk1 = Chunk.make(1, 2)
const chunk2 = Chunk.make(1, 2, 3)

// boolean
const areEqual = Equal.equals(chunk1, chunk2)
```

### Converting

To convert a `Chunk` to a `ReadonlyArray`, you can use the `toReadonlyArray` function:

```ts
import * as Chunk from "@effect/data/Chunk"

// ReadonlyArray<number>
const readonlyArray = Chunk.toReadonlyArray(Chunk.make(1, 2, 3))
```

Commit message:

Add `unsafeFromArray` explainer to chunk.mdx
Adapted from https://discord.com/channels/795981131316985866/1126578605619679272/1126579030867591279

pages/docs/data-types/chunk.mdx, after:

import { Warning } from "@/components/Callout"

# Chunk

A `Chunk<A>` represents a chunk of values of type `A`.
Chunks are usually backed by arrays, but expose a purely functional, safe interface to the underlying elements, and they become lazy on operations that would be costly with arrays, such as repeated concatenation. Like lists and arrays, `Chunk` is an ordered collection.

## Why Chunk?

Let's explore the reasons behind using `Chunk`:

- **Immutability**: In JavaScript, there is no built-in immutable data type that can efficiently represent an array. While the `Array` type exists, it provides a mutable interface, which means it can be modified after creation. `Chunk`, on the other hand, is an immutable array-like data structure that ensures the data remains unchanged. Immutability is beneficial in various scenarios, especially when dealing with concurrent programming.

- **High Performance**: `Chunk` not only offers immutability but also delivers high performance. It provides specialized operations for common array manipulations, such as appending a single element or concatenating two `Chunk`s together. These specialized operations are significantly faster than performing the same operations on regular JavaScript arrays.

## Operations

### Creating

To create an empty `Chunk`, you can use the following code:

```ts
import * as Chunk from "@effect/data/Chunk"

// Chunk<never>
const emptyChunk = Chunk.empty()
```

If you want to create a `Chunk` with specific values, you can use the `Chunk.make(...values){:ts}` function:

```ts
import * as Chunk from "@effect/data/Chunk"

// NonEmptyChunk<number>
const nonEmptyChunk = Chunk.make(1, 2, 3)
```

Alternatively, you can create a `Chunk` by providing a collection of values. There are multiple ways to achieve this:

- Creating a `Chunk` from a generic `Iterable`:

  ```ts
  import * as Chunk from "@effect/data/Chunk"
  import * as List from "@effect/data/List"

  // Chunk<number>
  const fromArray = Chunk.fromIterable([1, 2, 3])

  // Chunk<number>
  const fromList = Chunk.fromIterable(List.make(1, 2, 3))
  ```

- Creating a `Chunk` from an `Array`:
`Chunk.fromIterable` makes a chunk by cloning the iterable, which can be an expensive process for large iterables or when making many Chunks. `unsafeFromArray` doesn't do any cloning which can have performance benefits, but this breaks the assumption that Chunk is immutable. 

  ```ts
  import * as Chunk from "@effect/data/Chunk"

  // Chunk<number>
  const fromUnsafeArray = Chunk.unsafeFromArray([1, 2, 3])
  ```

<Warning>
  It is important to note that using `unsafeFromArray` can potentially lead to
  unsafe or unexpected behavior if the input array is mutated after conversion.
  If you want to ensure safety, it is recommended to use `fromIterable`.
</Warning>

### Concatenating

You can concatenate two Chunks using the `concat` function:

```ts
import * as Chunk from "@effect/data/Chunk"

// Chunk<string | number>
const concatenatedChunk = Chunk.concat(Chunk.make(1, 2), Chunk.make("a", "b"))
```

### Dropping

To drop elements from the beginning of a `Chunk`, you can use the `drop` function:

```ts
import * as Chunk from "@effect/data/Chunk"

// Chunk<number>
const droppedChunk = Chunk.drop(Chunk.make(1, 2, 3, 4), 2) // Drops the first 2 elements from the Chunk
```

### Comparing

You can compare two `Chunk`s for equality using the `Equal.equals` function:

```ts
import * as Chunk from "@effect/data/Chunk"
import * as Equal from "@effect/data/Equal"

const chunk1 = Chunk.make(1, 2)
const chunk2 = Chunk.make(1, 2, 3)

// boolean
const areEqual = Equal.equals(chunk1, chunk2)
```

### Converting

To convert a `Chunk` to a `ReadonlyArray`, you can use the `toReadonlyArray` function:

```ts
import * as Chunk from "@effect/data/Chunk"

// ReadonlyArray<number>
const readonlyArray = Chunk.toReadonlyArray(Chunk.make(1, 2, 3))
```
