pages/docs/context-management/services.mdx, before:

import { Idea, Warning } from "@/components/Callout"
import { Tabs, Tab } from "@/components/Code"

# Managing Services

In the context of programming, a service refers to a reusable component or functionality that can be used by different parts of an application. Services are designed to provide specific capabilities and can be shared across multiple modules or components.

Services often encapsulate common tasks or operations that are needed by different parts of an application. They can handle complex operations, interact with external systems or APIs, manage data, or perform other specialized tasks.

Services are typically designed to be modular and decoupled from the rest of the application. This allows them to be easily maintained, tested, and replaced without affecting the overall functionality of the application.

When working with services in Effect, it is important to understand the concept of context: in the type `Effect<R, E, A>`, the parameter `R` represents the contextual data required by the effect to be executed. This contextual data is stored in a collection called `Context`.

## Managing Services with Effects

So far, we have been working with effects that don't require any specific context. In those cases, the `R` parameter in the `Effect<R, E, A>` type has always been of type `never`.
However, there are situations where we need to work with effects that depend on specific services or contextual data.

In this guide, we will learn how to:

- Create Effects that depend on a specific context.
- Work with Effects that require a context or service dependencies.
- Provide the required context to the Effect.

Understanding how to manage services and provide the necessary context to effects is essential for building more complex and customizable programs. Let's dive in and explore these concepts in detail.

## Creating a Simple Service

Let's start by creating a service for a random number generator.

```ts filename="service.ts" file=<rootDir>/src/guide/context-management/services/service.ts

```

The code above defines an interface called `Random`, which represents our service.
It has a single method called `next` that returns a random number.

The `Random` value is what is referred to as a "Tag" in Effect.
It serves as a representation of the `Random` service and allows Effect to locate and use this service at runtime.

Conceptually, we can start building a mental model of the context of an effect by thinking of it as a `Map`:

```ts
Map<Tag, ServiceImpl>
```

Where the Tag acts as the "key" to the service implementation within the context.

<Idea>
  Naming the interface the same as the value makes it easier to import in
  TypeScript, so it's recommended that you name the interface the same as the
  related Tag.
</Idea>

If desired, you can specify a unique `key` as shown below:

```ts filename="service.ts" file=<rootDir>/src/guide/context-management/services/service-with-key.ts#L7

```

When you specify the `key`, it makes the `Tag` global, which means that two tags with the same `key` will refer to the same instance.

This feature comes in handy in scenarios where live reloads can occur, and you want to preserve the instance across reloads. It ensures that there is no duplication of instances (although it should not happen in the first place, some bundlers and frameworks can behave strangely, and we don't have control over them). Additionally, using a unique `key` allows for better printing of a tag. If you ever face "Service Not Found" or "Service Not Found: myapp/Random," the second is better and provides more helpful information to identify the issue.

## Using the Service

Now that we have our service interface defined, let's see how we can use it by building a pipeline.

<Tabs>
<Tab>

```ts file=<rootDir>/src/guide/context-management/services/program-gen.ts

```

In the code above, we can observe that we are able to yield the `Random` Tag as if it were an Effect itself.
This allows us to access the `next` method of the service.
We then use the `Effect.log` utility to log the generated random number.

</Tab>
<Tab>

```ts file=<rootDir>/src/guide/context-management/services/program-pipe.ts#L1-L8

```

In the code above, we can observe that we are able to flat-map over the `Random` Tag as if it were an Effect itself.
This allows us to access the `next` method of the service within the `flatMap` callback.
We then use the `Effect.log` utility to log the generated random number.

</Tab>
</Tabs>

It's worth noting that the type of the `program` variable includes `Random` in the `R` type parameter:

```ts /Random/
Effect<Random, never, void>
```

This indicates that our program requires the `Random` service to be provided in order to execute successfully.

If we attempt to execute the effect without providing the necessary service:

```ts
Effect.runSync(program)
```

We will encounter a type-checking error similar to the following:

```
Argument of type 'Effect<Random, never, void>' is not assignable to parameter of type 'Effect<never, never, void>'.
  Type 'Random' is not assignable to type 'never'.ts(2345)
```

To resolve this error and successfully execute the program, we need to provide an actual implementation of the `Random` service.

In the next section, we will explore how to implement and provide the `Random` service to our program, enabling us to run it successfully.

## Providing a Service implementation

In order to provide an actual implementation of the `Random` service, we can utilize the `Effect.provideService` function.

```ts file=<rootDir>/src/guide/context-management/services/program-pipe.ts#L10-

```

In the code snippet above, we call the `program` that we defined earlier and provide it with an implementation of the `Random` service.
We use the `Effect.provideService(effect, tag, implementation){:ts}` function to associate the `Random` service with its implementation, an object with a `next` method that generates a random number passed to `Random.of(){:ts}` (a convenience method to construct and return the service with the correct type).

Notice that the `R` type parameter of the `runnable` effect is now `never`. This indicates that the effect no longer requires any context to be provided. With the implementation of the `Random` service in place, we are able to run the program without any further dependencies.

By calling `Effect.runSync(runnable){:ts}`, we execute the effect and observe the result.

## Using the Service multiple times

<Warning>
  This section is relevant only if you are using the `pipe` syntax. If you are
  not using `pipe`, you can skip this section.
</Warning>

In the `program` definition, we have used the `Random` service only once:

```ts /random.next()/ file=<rootDir>/src/guide/context-management/services/program-pipe.ts#L1-L8

```

But what if we need to use it multiple times? In such cases, we need to ensure that the service handle (`random`) remains in scope.

```ts file=<rootDir>/src/guide/context-management/services/using-multiple-times-issue.ts

```

The solution depends on whether we are using `Effect.gen` or `pipe`:

<Tabs>
<Tab>

With `Effect.gen` our service handle is always in scope:

```ts /random.next()/ file=<rootDir>/src/guide/context-management/services/using-multiple-times-gen.ts#L1-L11

```

</Tab>
<Tab>

We can use `flatMap` to create a second pipeline and keep our service handle in scope:

```ts /random.next()/ file=<rootDir>/src/guide/context-management/services/using-multiple-times-pipe.ts#L1-L17

```

</Tab>
</Tabs>

## Using Multiple Services

When we need to manage multiple services in our program, we can utilize the `Effect.all(tags){:ts}` function.
By passing a tuple of tags, we can access the corresponding tuple of services:

<Tabs>
<Tab>

```ts file=<rootDir>/src/guide/context-management/services/multiple-services-gen.ts

```

</Tab>
<Tab>

```ts file=<rootDir>/src/guide/context-management/services/multiple-services-pipe.ts#L1-L22

```

</Tab>
</Tabs>

In the code above, we define two service interfaces: `Random` and `Logger`. Each interface represents a different service with its own set of methods.

The `program` effect now has an `R` type parameter of `Random | Logger`, indicating that it requires both the `Random` and `Logger` services to be provided.

```ts /Random | Logger/
Effect<Random | Logger, never, void>
```

To execute the `program`, we need to provide implementations for both services:

```ts file=<rootDir>/src/guide/context-management/services/multiple-services-pipe.ts#L24-L37

```

Alternatively, instead of calling `provideService` multiple times, we can combine the service implementations into a single `Context`:

```ts file=<rootDir>/src/guide/context-management/services/multiple-services-pipe.ts#L39-L48

```

and then provide the entire context using the `Effect.provideContext` function:

```ts file=<rootDir>/src/guide/context-management/services/multiple-services-pipe.ts#L50-

```

By providing the necessary implementations for each service, we ensure that the `runnable` effect can access and utilize both services when it is executed.

## Optional Services

There are situations where we may want to access a service implementation only if it is available.
In such cases, we can use the `Effect.serviceOption(tag){:ts}` function to handle this scenario.

The `serviceOption` function returns an implementation that can is available only if it is actually provided before executing this effect.
To represent this optionality it returns an `Option` of the implementation:

```ts
Effect<never, never, Option<Random>>
```

Let's take a look at an example that demonstrates the usage of optional services:

<Tabs>
<Tab>

To determine what action to take, we can use the `Option.isNone` function provided by the `Option` module. This function allows us to check if the service is available or not by returning `true` when the service is not available.

```ts file=<rootDir>/src/guide/context-management/services/serviceOption-gen.ts

```

</Tab>
<Tab>

To determine if we can use the service, we can use the `Option.match` function provided by the `Option` module. This function allows us to perform different actions based on whether the service is available or not. It takes two callbacks as arguments: one for the case when the service is not available, and another for the case when it is available.

```ts file=<rootDir>/src/guide/context-management/services/serviceOption-pipe.ts#L1-L15

```

</Tab>
</Tabs>

In the code above, we can observe that the `R` type parameter of the `program` effect is `never`, even though we are working with a service. This allows us to access something from the context only if it is actually provided before executing this effect.

When we run the `program` effect without providing the `Random` service:

```ts
Effect.runSync(program)
// ...more output... message=-1
```

We see that the log message contains `-1`, which is the default value we provided when the service was not available.

However, if we provide the `Random` service implementation:

```ts file=<rootDir>/src/guide/context-management/services/serviceOption-pipe.ts#L17-

```

We can observe that the log message now contains a random number generated by the `next` method of the `Random` service.

By using the `Effect.serviceOption` function, we can gracefully handle scenarios where a service may or may not be available, providing flexibility in our programs.

In the upcoming section, we will delve into the topic of [Layers](layers). Layers are powerful constructs for creating services and composing them together, enabling us to build complex dependency graphs that can be seamlessly provided to Effects.

Commit message:

use Console.log when possible

pages/docs/context-management/services.mdx, after:

import { Idea, Warning } from "@/components/Callout"
import { Tabs, Tab } from "@/components/Code"

# Managing Services

In the context of programming, a service refers to a reusable component or functionality that can be used by different parts of an application. Services are designed to provide specific capabilities and can be shared across multiple modules or components.

Services often encapsulate common tasks or operations that are needed by different parts of an application. They can handle complex operations, interact with external systems or APIs, manage data, or perform other specialized tasks.

Services are typically designed to be modular and decoupled from the rest of the application. This allows them to be easily maintained, tested, and replaced without affecting the overall functionality of the application.

When working with services in Effect, it is important to understand the concept of context: in the type `Effect<R, E, A>`, the parameter `R` represents the contextual data required by the effect to be executed. This contextual data is stored in a collection called `Context`.

## Managing Services with Effects

So far, we have been working with effects that don't require any specific context. In those cases, the `R` parameter in the `Effect<R, E, A>` type has always been of type `never`.
However, there are situations where we need to work with effects that depend on specific services or contextual data.

In this guide, we will learn how to:

- Create Effects that depend on a specific context.
- Work with Effects that require a context or service dependencies.
- Provide the required context to the Effect.

Understanding how to manage services and provide the necessary context to effects is essential for building more complex and customizable programs. Let's dive in and explore these concepts in detail.

## Creating a Simple Service

Let's start by creating a service for a random number generator.

```ts filename="service.ts" file=<rootDir>/src/guide/context-management/services/service.ts

```

The code above defines an interface called `Random`, which represents our service.
It has a single operation called `next` that returns a random number.

The `Random` value is what is referred to as a "Tag" in Effect.
It serves as a representation of the `Random` service and allows Effect to locate and use this service at runtime.

Conceptually, we can start building a mental model of the context of an effect by thinking of it as a `Map`:

```ts
Map<Tag, ServiceImpl>
```

Where the Tag acts as the "key" to the service implementation within the context.

<Idea>
  Naming the interface the same as the value makes it easier to import in
  TypeScript, so it's recommended that you name the interface the same as the
  related Tag.
</Idea>

If desired, you can specify a unique `key` as shown below:

```ts filename="service.ts" file=<rootDir>/src/guide/context-management/services/service-with-key.ts#L7

```

When you specify the `key`, it makes the `Tag` global, which means that two tags with the same `key` will refer to the same instance.

This feature comes in handy in scenarios where live reloads can occur, and you want to preserve the instance across reloads. It ensures that there is no duplication of instances (although it should not happen in the first place, some bundlers and frameworks can behave strangely, and we don't have control over them). Additionally, using a unique `key` allows for better printing of a tag. If you ever face "Service Not Found" or "Service Not Found: myapp/Random," the second is better and provides more helpful information to identify the issue.

## Using the Service

Now that we have our service interface defined, let's see how we can use it by building a pipeline.

<Tabs>
<Tab>

```ts file=<rootDir>/src/guide/context-management/services/program-gen.ts

```

In the code above, we can observe that we are able to yield the `Random` Tag as if it were an Effect itself.
This allows us to access the `next` operation of the service.
We then use the `Console.log` utility to log the generated random number.

</Tab>
<Tab>

```ts file=<rootDir>/src/guide/context-management/services/program-pipe.ts#L1-L8

```

In the code above, we can observe that we are able to flat-map over the `Random` Tag as if it were an Effect itself.
This allows us to access the `next` operation of the service within the `flatMap` callback.
We then use the `Console.log` utility to log the generated random number.

</Tab>
</Tabs>

It's worth noting that the type of the `program` variable includes `Random` in the `R` type parameter:

```ts /Random/
Effect<Random, never, void>
```

This indicates that our program requires the `Random` service to be provided in order to execute successfully.

If we attempt to execute the effect without providing the necessary service:

```ts
Effect.runSync(program)
```

We will encounter a type-checking error similar to the following:

```
Argument of type 'Effect<Random, never, void>' is not assignable to parameter of type 'Effect<never, never, void>'.
  Type 'Random' is not assignable to type 'never'.ts(2345)
```

To resolve this error and successfully execute the program, we need to provide an actual implementation of the `Random` service.

In the next section, we will explore how to implement and provide the `Random` service to our program, enabling us to run it successfully.

## Providing a Service implementation

In order to provide an actual implementation of the `Random` service, we can utilize the `Effect.provideService` function.

```ts file=<rootDir>/src/guide/context-management/services/program-pipe.ts#L12-

```

In the code snippet above, we call the `program` that we defined earlier and provide it with an implementation of the `Random` service.
We use the `Effect.provideService(effect, tag, implementation){:ts}` function to associate the `Random` service with its implementation, an object with a `next` operation that generates a random number passed to `Random.of(){:ts}` (a convenience function to construct and return the service with the correct type).

Notice that the `R` type parameter of the `runnable` effect is now `never`. This indicates that the effect no longer requires any context to be provided. With the implementation of the `Random` service in place, we are able to run the program without any further dependencies.

By calling `Effect.runSync(runnable){:ts}`, we execute the effect and observe the result.

## Using the Service multiple times

<Warning>
  This section is relevant only if you are using the `pipe` syntax. If you are
  not using `pipe`, you can skip this section.
</Warning>

In the `program` definition, we have used the `Random` service only once:

```ts /random.next()/ file=<rootDir>/src/guide/context-management/services/program-pipe.ts#L1-L8

```

But what if we need to use it multiple times? In such cases, we need to ensure that the service handle (`random`) remains in scope.

```ts file=<rootDir>/src/guide/context-management/services/using-multiple-times-issue.ts

```

The solution depends on whether we are using `Effect.gen` or `pipe`:

<Tabs>
<Tab>

With `Effect.gen` our service handle is always in scope:

```ts /random.next()/ file=<rootDir>/src/guide/context-management/services/using-multiple-times-gen.ts#L1-L11

```

</Tab>
<Tab>

We can use `flatMap` to create a second pipeline and keep our service handle in scope:

```ts /random.next()/ file=<rootDir>/src/guide/context-management/services/using-multiple-times-pipe.ts#L1-L17

```

</Tab>
</Tabs>

## Using Multiple Services

When we need to manage multiple services in our program, we can utilize the `Effect.all(tags){:ts}` function.
By passing a tuple of tags, we can access the corresponding tuple of services:

<Tabs>
<Tab>

```ts file=<rootDir>/src/guide/context-management/services/multiple-services-gen.ts

```

</Tab>
<Tab>

```ts file=<rootDir>/src/guide/context-management/services/multiple-services-pipe.ts#L1-L22

```

</Tab>
</Tabs>

In the code above, we define two service interfaces: `Random` and `Logger`. Each interface represents a different service with its own set of operations.

The `program` effect now has an `R` type parameter of `Random | Logger`, indicating that it requires both the `Random` and `Logger` services to be provided.

```ts /Random | Logger/
Effect<Random | Logger, never, void>
```

To execute the `program`, we need to provide implementations for both services:

```ts file=<rootDir>/src/guide/context-management/services/multiple-services-pipe.ts#L24-L37

```

Alternatively, instead of calling `provideService` multiple times, we can combine the service implementations into a single `Context`:

```ts file=<rootDir>/src/guide/context-management/services/multiple-services-pipe.ts#L39-L48

```

and then provide the entire context using the `Effect.provideContext` function:

```ts file=<rootDir>/src/guide/context-management/services/multiple-services-pipe.ts#L50-

```

By providing the necessary implementations for each service, we ensure that the `runnable` effect can access and utilize both services when it is executed.

## Optional Services

There are situations where we may want to access a service implementation only if it is available.
In such cases, we can use the `Effect.serviceOption(tag){:ts}` function to handle this scenario.

The `serviceOption` function returns an implementation that can is available only if it is actually provided before executing this effect.
To represent this optionality it returns an `Option` of the implementation:

```ts
Effect<never, never, Option<Random>>
```

Let's take a look at an example that demonstrates the usage of optional services:

<Tabs>
<Tab>

To determine what action to take, we can use the `Option.isNone` function provided by the `Option` module. This function allows us to check if the service is available or not by returning `true` when the service is not available.

```ts file=<rootDir>/src/guide/context-management/services/serviceOption-gen.ts

```

</Tab>
<Tab>

To determine if we can use the service, we can use the `Option.match` function provided by the `Option` module. This function allows us to perform different actions based on whether the service is available or not. It takes two callbacks as arguments: one for the case when the service is not available, and another for the case when it is available.

```ts file=<rootDir>/src/guide/context-management/services/serviceOption-pipe.ts#L1-L15

```

</Tab>
</Tabs>

In the code above, we can observe that the `R` type parameter of the `program` effect is `never`, even though we are working with a service. This allows us to access something from the context only if it is actually provided before executing this effect.

When we run the `program` effect without providing the `Random` service:

```ts
Effect.runSync(program)
// ...more output... message=-1
```

We see that the log message contains `-1`, which is the default value we provided when the service was not available.

However, if we provide the `Random` service implementation:

```ts file=<rootDir>/src/guide/context-management/services/serviceOption-pipe.ts#L17-

```

We can observe that the log message now contains a random number generated by the `next` operation of the `Random` service.

By using the `Effect.serviceOption` function, we can gracefully handle scenarios where a service may or may not be available, providing flexibility in our programs.

In the upcoming section, we will delve into the topic of [Layers](layers). Layers are powerful constructs for creating services and composing them together, enabling us to build complex dependency graphs that can be seamlessly provided to Effects.
