content/docs/700-other/300-data-types/duration.mdx, before:

---
title: Duration
excerpt: Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet, consetetur sadipscing elitr, sed diam nonumy eirmod tempor invidunt ut labore.
bottomNavigation: pagination
---

The `Duration` data type data type is used to represent specific non-negative spans of time. It is commonly used to represent time intervals or durations in various operations, such as timeouts, delays, or scheduling. The `Duration` type provides a convenient way to work with time units and perform calculations on durations.

## Creating Durations

The `Duration` module provides several constructors to create durations of different units. Here are some examples:

```ts twoslash
import { Duration } from "effect"

const duration1 = Duration.millis(100) // Create a duration of 100 milliseconds
const duration2 = Duration.seconds(2) // Create a duration of 2 seconds
const duration3 = Duration.minutes(5) // Create a duration of 5 minutes
```

You can create durations using units such as nanoseconds, microsecond, milliseconds, seconds, minutes, hours, days, and weeks.

If you want to create an infinite duration, you can use `Duration.infinity`:

```ts twoslash
import { Duration } from "effect"

console.log(String(Duration.infinity))
/*
Output:
{
  "_id": "Duration",
  "_tag": "Infinity"
}
*/
```

Another option for creating durations is using the `Duration.decode` helper:

- `number`s are treated as milliseconds
- `bigint`s are treated as nanoseconds
- strings must be formatted as `"${number} ${unit}"`

```ts twoslash
// @target: ES2020
import { Duration } from "effect"

Duration.decode(10n) // same as Duration.nanos(10)
Duration.decode(100) // same as Duration.millis(100)
Duration.decode(Infinity) // same as Duration.infinity

Duration.decode("10 nanos") // same as Duration.nanos(10)
Duration.decode("20 micros") // same as Duration.micros(20)
Duration.decode("100 millis") // same as Duration.millis(100)
Duration.decode("2 seconds") // same as Duration.seconds(2)
Duration.decode("5 minutes") // same as Duration.minutes(5)
Duration.decode("7 hours") // same as Duration.hours(7)
Duration.decode("3 weeks") // same as Duration.weeks(3)
```

## Getting the Duration Value

You can retrieve the value of a duration in milliseconds using the `toMillis` function:

```ts twoslash
import { Duration } from "effect"

console.log(Duration.toMillis(Duration.seconds(30))) // Output: 30000
```

You can retrieve the value of a duration in nanoseconds using the `toNanos` function:

```ts twoslash
import { Duration } from "effect"

console.log(Duration.toNanos(Duration.millis(100)))
/*
Output:
{
  _id: "Option",
  _tag: "Some",
  value: 100000000n
}
*/
```

Note that `toNanos` returns an `Option<bigint>` since the duration might be infinite. If you want a `bigint` as a return type, you can use `unsafeToNanos`. However, note that it will throw an error for infinite durations:

```ts twoslash
import { Duration } from "effect"

console.log(Duration.unsafeToNanos(Duration.millis(100))) // Output: 100000000n
console.log(Duration.unsafeToNanos(Duration.infinity)) // throws "Cannot convert infinite duration to nanos"
```

## Comparing Durations

You can compare two durations using the following functions:

| **Function**           | **Description**                                                             |
| ---------------------- | --------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `lessThan`             | returns `true` if the first duration is less than the second                |
| `lessThanOrEqualTo`    | returns `true` if the first duration is less than or equal to the second    |
| `greaterThan`          | returns `true` if the first duration is greater than the second             |
| `greaterThanOrEqualTo` | returns `true` if the first duration is greater than or equal to the second |

```ts twoslash
import { Duration } from "effect"

const duration1 = Duration.seconds(30)
const duration2 = Duration.minutes(1)

console.log(Duration.lessThan(duration1, duration2)) // Output: true
console.log(Duration.lessThanOrEqualTo(duration1, duration2)) // Output: true
console.log(Duration.greaterThan(duration1, duration2)) // Output: false
console.log(Duration.greaterThanOrEqualTo(duration1, duration2)) // Output: false
```

## Performing Arithmetic Operations

You can perform arithmetic operations on durations, such as addition and multiplication. Here are some examples:

```ts twoslash
import { Duration } from "effect"

const duration1 = Duration.seconds(30)
const duration2 = Duration.minutes(1)

console.log(String(Duration.sum(duration1, duration2)))
/*
Output:
{
  "_id": "Duration",
  "_tag": "Millis",
  "millis": 90000
}
*/

console.log(String(Duration.times(duration1, 2))) // Output: Duration("60000 millis")
/*
Output:
{
  "_id": "Duration",
  "_tag": "Millis",
  "millis": 60000
}
*/
```

Commit message:

replace excerpt placeholders with actual content (index pages excluded) (#424)

content/docs/700-other/300-data-types/duration.mdx, after:

---
title: Duration
excerpt: Explore the `Duration` data type in Effect for representing non-negative spans of time. Learn to create durations with different units, including milliseconds, seconds, and minutes. Discover options for creating infinite durations and decoding values. Retrieve duration values in milliseconds or nanoseconds. Compare durations and perform arithmetic operations like addition and multiplication. Master the capabilities of the `Duration` module for efficient time handling in your applications.
bottomNavigation: pagination
---

The `Duration` data type data type is used to represent specific non-negative spans of time. It is commonly used to represent time intervals or durations in various operations, such as timeouts, delays, or scheduling. The `Duration` type provides a convenient way to work with time units and perform calculations on durations.

## Creating Durations

The `Duration` module provides several constructors to create durations of different units. Here are some examples:

```ts twoslash
import { Duration } from "effect"

const duration1 = Duration.millis(100) // Create a duration of 100 milliseconds
const duration2 = Duration.seconds(2) // Create a duration of 2 seconds
const duration3 = Duration.minutes(5) // Create a duration of 5 minutes
```

You can create durations using units such as nanoseconds, microsecond, milliseconds, seconds, minutes, hours, days, and weeks.

If you want to create an infinite duration, you can use `Duration.infinity`:

```ts twoslash
import { Duration } from "effect"

console.log(String(Duration.infinity))
/*
Output:
{
  "_id": "Duration",
  "_tag": "Infinity"
}
*/
```

Another option for creating durations is using the `Duration.decode` helper:

- `number`s are treated as milliseconds
- `bigint`s are treated as nanoseconds
- strings must be formatted as `"${number} ${unit}"`

```ts twoslash
// @target: ES2020
import { Duration } from "effect"

Duration.decode(10n) // same as Duration.nanos(10)
Duration.decode(100) // same as Duration.millis(100)
Duration.decode(Infinity) // same as Duration.infinity

Duration.decode("10 nanos") // same as Duration.nanos(10)
Duration.decode("20 micros") // same as Duration.micros(20)
Duration.decode("100 millis") // same as Duration.millis(100)
Duration.decode("2 seconds") // same as Duration.seconds(2)
Duration.decode("5 minutes") // same as Duration.minutes(5)
Duration.decode("7 hours") // same as Duration.hours(7)
Duration.decode("3 weeks") // same as Duration.weeks(3)
```

## Getting the Duration Value

You can retrieve the value of a duration in milliseconds using the `toMillis` function:

```ts twoslash
import { Duration } from "effect"

console.log(Duration.toMillis(Duration.seconds(30))) // Output: 30000
```

You can retrieve the value of a duration in nanoseconds using the `toNanos` function:

```ts twoslash
import { Duration } from "effect"

console.log(Duration.toNanos(Duration.millis(100)))
/*
Output:
{
  _id: "Option",
  _tag: "Some",
  value: 100000000n
}
*/
```

Note that `toNanos` returns an `Option<bigint>` since the duration might be infinite. If you want a `bigint` as a return type, you can use `unsafeToNanos`. However, note that it will throw an error for infinite durations:

```ts twoslash
import { Duration } from "effect"

console.log(Duration.unsafeToNanos(Duration.millis(100))) // Output: 100000000n
console.log(Duration.unsafeToNanos(Duration.infinity)) // throws "Cannot convert infinite duration to nanos"
```

## Comparing Durations

You can compare two durations using the following functions:

| **Function**           | **Description**                                                             |
| ---------------------- | --------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `lessThan`             | returns `true` if the first duration is less than the second                |
| `lessThanOrEqualTo`    | returns `true` if the first duration is less than or equal to the second    |
| `greaterThan`          | returns `true` if the first duration is greater than the second             |
| `greaterThanOrEqualTo` | returns `true` if the first duration is greater than or equal to the second |

```ts twoslash
import { Duration } from "effect"

const duration1 = Duration.seconds(30)
const duration2 = Duration.minutes(1)

console.log(Duration.lessThan(duration1, duration2)) // Output: true
console.log(Duration.lessThanOrEqualTo(duration1, duration2)) // Output: true
console.log(Duration.greaterThan(duration1, duration2)) // Output: false
console.log(Duration.greaterThanOrEqualTo(duration1, duration2)) // Output: false
```

## Performing Arithmetic Operations

You can perform arithmetic operations on durations, such as addition and multiplication. Here are some examples:

```ts twoslash
import { Duration } from "effect"

const duration1 = Duration.seconds(30)
const duration2 = Duration.minutes(1)

console.log(String(Duration.sum(duration1, duration2)))
/*
Output:
{
  "_id": "Duration",
  "_tag": "Millis",
  "millis": 90000
}
*/

console.log(String(Duration.times(duration1, 2))) // Output: Duration("60000 millis")
/*
Output:
{
  "_id": "Duration",
  "_tag": "Millis",
  "millis": 60000
}
*/
```
