content/docs/700-other/300-data-types/either.mdx, before:

---
title: Either
excerpt: Explore the `Either` data type in Effect for representing exclusive values using `Left` and `Right`. Learn to create Eithers, use guards for checking types, and perform pattern matching. Discover operations like mapping over `Right` and `Left` values, and understand interoperability with the `Effect` type. Master the expressive and versatile features of `Either` for error handling and result representation in your applications.
bottomNavigation: pagination
---

The `Either` data type represents two exclusive possible values: an `Either<R, L>` can be either a `Right` value or a `Left` value, where `R` represents the type of the `Right` value and `L` represents the type of the `Left` value.

## Creating Eithers

You can create an `Either` using the `Either.right` and `Either.left` constructors.

- The `Either.right` function takes a value of type `R` and constructs a `Either<R, never>`:

  ```ts twoslash
  import { Either } from "effect"

  const rightValue = Either.right(42)
  ```

- The `Either.left` function takes a value of type `L` and constructs a `Either<never, L>`:

  ```ts twoslash
  import { Either } from "effect"

  const leftValue = Either.left("not a number")
  ```

## Guards

You can determine whether an `Either` is a `Left` or a `Right` by using the `Either.isLeft` and `Either.isRight` guards:

```ts twoslash
import { Either } from "effect"

const foo = Either.right(42)

if (Either.isLeft(foo)) {
  console.log(`The left value is: ${foo.left}`)
} else {
  console.log(`The Right value is: ${foo.right}`)
}
// Output: "The Right value is: 42"
```

## Pattern Matching

The `Either.match` function allows you to handle different cases of an `Either` by providing separate callbacks for each case:

```ts twoslash
import { Either } from "effect"

const foo = Either.right(42)

const message = Either.match(foo, {
  onLeft: (left) => `The left value is: ${left}`,
  onRight: (right) => `The Right value is: ${right}`
})

console.log(message) // Output: "The Right value is: 42"
```

<Idea>
  Using `match` instead of `isLeft` or `isRight` can be more expressive and
  provide a clear way to handle both cases of an `Either`.
</Idea>

## Working with Either

Once you have an `Either`, there are several operations you can perform on it.

### Mapping over the Right Value

You can use the `Either.map` function to transform the `Right` value of an `Either`.
The `Either.map` function takes a transformation function that maps the `Right` value.

If the `Either` value is a `Left` value, the transformation function is **ignored**, and the `Left` value is returned unchanged.

**Example**

```ts twoslash
import { Either } from "effect"

Either.map(Either.right(1), (n) => n + 1) // right(2)

Either.map(Either.left("not a number"), (n) => n + 1) // left("not a number")
```

### Mapping over the Left Value

You can use the `Either.mapLeft` function to transform the `Left` value of an Either. The `mapLeft` function takes a transformation function that maps the `Left`.

If the `Either` value is a `Right` value, the transformation function is **ignored**, and the `Right` value is returned unchanged.

**Example**

```ts twoslash
import { Either } from "effect"

Either.mapLeft(Either.right(1), (s) => s + "!") // right(1)

Either.mapLeft(Either.left("not a number"), (s) => s + "!") // left("not a number!")
```

### Mapping over Both Values

You can use the `Either.mapBoth` function to transform both the `Left` and `Right` values of an `Either`. The `mapBoth` function takes two transformation functions: one for the `Left` value and one for the `Right` value.

**Example**

```ts twoslash
import { Either } from "effect"

Either.mapBoth(Either.right(1), {
  onLeft: (s) => s + "!",
  onRight: (n) => n + 1
}) // right(2)

Either.mapBoth(Either.left("not a number"), {
  onLeft: (s) => s + "!",
  onRight: (n) => n + 1
}) // left("not a number!")
```

## Interop with Effect

The `Either` type is a subtype of the `Effect` type, which means that it can be seamlessly used with functions from the `Effect` module. These functions are primarily designed to work with `Effect` values, but they can also handle `Either` values and process them correctly.

In the context of `Effect`, the two members of the `Either` type are treated as follows:

- `Left<L>` is equivalent to `Effect<never, L>`
- `Right<R>` is equivalent to `Effect<R>`

To illustrate this interoperability, let's consider the following example:

```ts twoslash
import { Effect, Either } from "effect"

const head = <A>(array: ReadonlyArray<A>): Either.Either<A, string> =>
  array.length > 0 ? Either.right(array[0]) : Either.left("empty array")

const foo = Effect.runSync(Effect.andThen(Effect.succeed([1, 2, 3]), head))
console.log(foo) // Output: 1

const bar = Effect.runSync(Effect.andThen(Effect.succeed([]), head)) // throws "empty array"
```

## Combining Two or More Eithers

The `Either.zipWith` function allows you to combine two `Either` values using a provided function. It creates a new `Either` that holds the combined value of both original `Either` values.

```ts twoslash
import { Either } from "effect"

const maybeName: Either.Either<string, Error> = Either.right("John")
const maybeAge: Either.Either<number, Error> = Either.right(25)

const person = Either.zipWith(maybeName, maybeAge, (name, age) => ({
  name: name.toUpperCase(),
  age
}))

console.log(person)
/*
Output:
{ _id: 'Either', _tag: 'Right', right: { name: 'JOHN', age: 25 } }
*/
```

The `Either.zipWith` function takes three arguments:

- The first `Either` you want to combine
- The second `Either` you want to combine
- A function that takes two arguments, which are the values held by the two `Either`, and returns the combined value

It's important to note that if either of the two `Either` values is `Left`, the resulting `Either` will also be `Left`, containing the value of the first encountered `Left`:

```ts {4-6} twoslash
import { Either } from "effect"

const maybeName: Either.Either<string, Error> = Either.right("John")
const maybeAge: Either.Either<number, Error> = Either.left(
  new Error("Oh no!")
)

const person = Either.zipWith(maybeName, maybeAge, (name, age) => ({
  name: name.toUpperCase(),
  age
}))

console.log(person)
/*
Output:
{ _id: 'Either', _tag: 'Left', left: new Error("Oh no!") }
*/
```

If you need to combine two or more `Either`s without transforming the values they hold, you can use `Either.all`, which takes a collection of `Either`s and returns an `Either` with the same structure.

- If a tuple is provided, the returned `Either` will contain a tuple with the same length.
- If a struct is provided, the returned `Either` will contain a struct with the same keys.
- If an iterable is provided, the returned `Either` will contain an array.

```ts twoslash
import { Either } from "effect"

const maybeName: Either.Either<string, Error> = Either.right("John")
const maybeAge: Either.Either<number, Error> = Either.right(25)

const tuple = Either.all([maybeName, maybeAge])

const struct = Either.all({ name: maybeName, age: maybeAge })
```

Note that if one or more `Either` is a `Left`, then the first encountered `Left` will be returned:

```ts
import { Either } from "effect"

const maybeName: Either.Either<string, Error> = Either.left(
  new Error("name not found")
)
const maybeAge: Either.Either<number, Error> = Either.left(
  new Error("age not found")
)

const tuple = Either.all([maybeName, maybeAge])

console.log(tuple)
/*
Output:
{ _id: 'Either', _tag: 'Left', left: new Error("name not found") }
*/
```

## gen

Similar to [Effect.gen](../../guides/essentials/using-generators), there's also `Either.gen`, which provides a convenient syntax, akin to async/await, for writing code involving `Either` and using generators.

Let's revisit the previous example, this time using `Either.gen` instead of `Either.zipWith`:

```ts twoslash
import { Either } from "effect"

const maybeName: Either.Either<string, Error> = Either.right("John")
const maybeAge: Either.Either<number, Error> = Either.right(25)

const person = Either.gen(function* () {
  const name = (yield* maybeName).toUpperCase()
  const age = yield* maybeAge
  return { name, age }
})

console.log(person)
/*
Output:
{ _id: 'Either', _tag: 'Right', right: { name: 'JOHN', age: 25 } }
*/
```

Once again, if either of the two `Either` values is `Left`, the resulting `Either` will also be `Left`:

```ts twoslash
import { Either } from "effect"

const maybeName: Either.Either<string, Error> = Either.right("John")
const maybeAge: Either.Either<number, Error> = Either.left(
  new Error("Oh no!")
)

const person = Either.gen(function* () {
  const name = (yield* maybeName).toUpperCase()
  const age = yield* maybeAge
  return { name, age }
})

console.log(person)
/*
Output:
{ _id: 'Either', _tag: 'Left', left: new Error("Oh no!") }
*/
```

Commit message:

chore: Update Either documentation and mention preferred use of Exit

content/docs/700-other/300-data-types/either.mdx, after:

---
title: Either
excerpt: Explore the `Either` data type in Effect for representing exclusive values using `Left` and `Right`. Learn to create Eithers, use guards for checking types, and perform pattern matching. Discover operations like mapping over `Right` and `Left` values, and understand interoperability with the `Effect` type. Master the expressive and versatile features of `Either` for error handling and result representation in your applications.
bottomNavigation: pagination
---

The `Either` data type represents two exclusive possible values: an `Either<R, L>` can be either a `Right` value or a `Left` value, where `R` represents the type of the `Right` value and `L` represents the type of the `Left` value.

## Understanding Either and Exit

- Either is primarily used as a **simple discriminated union** and is not recommended as the main result type for operations requiring detailed error information.

- [Exit](exit) is the preferred **result type** within Effect for capturing comprehensive details about failures.
  It encapsulates the outcomes of effectful computations, distinguishing between success and various failure modes, such as errors, defects and interruptions.

## Creating Eithers

You can create an `Either` using the `Either.right` and `Either.left` constructors.

- The `Either.right` function takes a value of type `R` and constructs a `Either<R, never>`:

  ```ts twoslash
  import { Either } from "effect"

  const rightValue = Either.right(42)
  ```

- The `Either.left` function takes a value of type `L` and constructs a `Either<never, L>`:

  ```ts twoslash
  import { Either } from "effect"

  const leftValue = Either.left("not a number")
  ```

## Guards

You can determine whether an `Either` is a `Left` or a `Right` by using the `Either.isLeft` and `Either.isRight` guards:

```ts twoslash
import { Either } from "effect"

const foo = Either.right(42)

if (Either.isLeft(foo)) {
  console.log(`The left value is: ${foo.left}`)
} else {
  console.log(`The Right value is: ${foo.right}`)
}
// Output: "The Right value is: 42"
```

## Pattern Matching

The `Either.match` function allows you to handle different cases of an `Either` by providing separate callbacks for each case:

```ts twoslash
import { Either } from "effect"

const foo = Either.right(42)

const message = Either.match(foo, {
  onLeft: (left) => `The left value is: ${left}`,
  onRight: (right) => `The Right value is: ${right}`
})

console.log(message) // Output: "The Right value is: 42"
```

<Idea>
  Using `match` instead of `isLeft` or `isRight` can be more expressive and
  provide a clear way to handle both cases of an `Either`.
</Idea>

## Working with Either

Once you have an `Either`, there are several operations you can perform on it.

### Mapping over the Right Value

You can use the `Either.map` function to transform the `Right` value of an `Either`.
The `Either.map` function takes a transformation function that maps the `Right` value.

If the `Either` value is a `Left` value, the transformation function is **ignored**, and the `Left` value is returned unchanged.

**Example**

```ts twoslash
import { Either } from "effect"

Either.map(Either.right(1), (n) => n + 1) // right(2)

Either.map(Either.left("not a number"), (n) => n + 1) // left("not a number")
```

### Mapping over the Left Value

You can use the `Either.mapLeft` function to transform the `Left` value of an Either. The `mapLeft` function takes a transformation function that maps the `Left`.

If the `Either` value is a `Right` value, the transformation function is **ignored**, and the `Right` value is returned unchanged.

**Example**

```ts twoslash
import { Either } from "effect"

Either.mapLeft(Either.right(1), (s) => s + "!") // right(1)

Either.mapLeft(Either.left("not a number"), (s) => s + "!") // left("not a number!")
```

### Mapping over Both Values

You can use the `Either.mapBoth` function to transform both the `Left` and `Right` values of an `Either`. The `mapBoth` function takes two transformation functions: one for the `Left` value and one for the `Right` value.

**Example**

```ts twoslash
import { Either } from "effect"

Either.mapBoth(Either.right(1), {
  onLeft: (s) => s + "!",
  onRight: (n) => n + 1
}) // right(2)

Either.mapBoth(Either.left("not a number"), {
  onLeft: (s) => s + "!",
  onRight: (n) => n + 1
}) // left("not a number!")
```

## Interop with Effect

The `Either` type is a subtype of the `Effect` type, which means that it can be seamlessly used with functions from the `Effect` module. These functions are primarily designed to work with `Effect` values, but they can also handle `Either` values and process them correctly.

In the context of `Effect`, the two members of the `Either` type are treated as follows:

- `Left<L>` is equivalent to `Effect<never, L>`
- `Right<R>` is equivalent to `Effect<R>`

To illustrate this interoperability, let's consider the following example:

```ts twoslash
import { Effect, Either } from "effect"

const head = <A>(array: ReadonlyArray<A>): Either.Either<A, string> =>
  array.length > 0 ? Either.right(array[0]) : Either.left("empty array")

const foo = Effect.runSync(Effect.andThen(Effect.succeed([1, 2, 3]), head))
console.log(foo) // Output: 1

const bar = Effect.runSync(Effect.andThen(Effect.succeed([]), head)) // throws "empty array"
```

## Combining Two or More Eithers

The `Either.zipWith` function allows you to combine two `Either` values using a provided function. It creates a new `Either` that holds the combined value of both original `Either` values.

```ts twoslash
import { Either } from "effect"

const maybeName: Either.Either<string, Error> = Either.right("John")
const maybeAge: Either.Either<number, Error> = Either.right(25)

const person = Either.zipWith(maybeName, maybeAge, (name, age) => ({
  name: name.toUpperCase(),
  age
}))

console.log(person)
/*
Output:
{ _id: 'Either', _tag: 'Right', right: { name: 'JOHN', age: 25 } }
*/
```

The `Either.zipWith` function takes three arguments:

- The first `Either` you want to combine
- The second `Either` you want to combine
- A function that takes two arguments, which are the values held by the two `Either`, and returns the combined value

It's important to note that if either of the two `Either` values is `Left`, the resulting `Either` will also be `Left`, containing the value of the first encountered `Left`:

```ts {4-6} twoslash
import { Either } from "effect"

const maybeName: Either.Either<string, Error> = Either.right("John")
const maybeAge: Either.Either<number, Error> = Either.left(
  new Error("Oh no!")
)

const person = Either.zipWith(maybeName, maybeAge, (name, age) => ({
  name: name.toUpperCase(),
  age
}))

console.log(person)
/*
Output:
{ _id: 'Either', _tag: 'Left', left: new Error("Oh no!") }
*/
```

If you need to combine two or more `Either`s without transforming the values they hold, you can use `Either.all`, which takes a collection of `Either`s and returns an `Either` with the same structure.

- If a tuple is provided, the returned `Either` will contain a tuple with the same length.
- If a struct is provided, the returned `Either` will contain a struct with the same keys.
- If an iterable is provided, the returned `Either` will contain an array.

```ts twoslash
import { Either } from "effect"

const maybeName: Either.Either<string, Error> = Either.right("John")
const maybeAge: Either.Either<number, Error> = Either.right(25)

const tuple = Either.all([maybeName, maybeAge])

const struct = Either.all({ name: maybeName, age: maybeAge })
```

Note that if one or more `Either` is a `Left`, then the first encountered `Left` will be returned:

```ts
import { Either } from "effect"

const maybeName: Either.Either<string, Error> = Either.left(
  new Error("name not found")
)
const maybeAge: Either.Either<number, Error> = Either.left(
  new Error("age not found")
)

const tuple = Either.all([maybeName, maybeAge])

console.log(tuple)
/*
Output:
{ _id: 'Either', _tag: 'Left', left: new Error("name not found") }
*/
```

## gen

Similar to [Effect.gen](../../guides/essentials/using-generators), there's also `Either.gen`, which provides a convenient syntax, akin to async/await, for writing code involving `Either` and using generators.

Let's revisit the previous example, this time using `Either.gen` instead of `Either.zipWith`:

```ts twoslash
import { Either } from "effect"

const maybeName: Either.Either<string, Error> = Either.right("John")
const maybeAge: Either.Either<number, Error> = Either.right(25)

const person = Either.gen(function* () {
  const name = (yield* maybeName).toUpperCase()
  const age = yield* maybeAge
  return { name, age }
})

console.log(person)
/*
Output:
{ _id: 'Either', _tag: 'Right', right: { name: 'JOHN', age: 25 } }
*/
```

Once again, if either of the two `Either` values is `Left`, the resulting `Either` will also be `Left`:

```ts twoslash
import { Either } from "effect"

const maybeName: Either.Either<string, Error> = Either.right("John")
const maybeAge: Either.Either<number, Error> = Either.left(
  new Error("Oh no!")
)

const person = Either.gen(function* () {
  const name = (yield* maybeName).toUpperCase()
  const age = yield* maybeAge
  return { name, age }
})

console.log(person)
/*
Output:
{ _id: 'Either', _tag: 'Left', left: new Error("Oh no!") }
*/
```
