content/src/content/docs/docs/getting-started/introduction.mdx, before:

---
title: Introduction
description: Explore Effect, a TypeScript library for building scalable, maintainable, and type-safe applications with advanced concurrency, error handling, and resource management.
sidebar:
  order: 0
---

Welcome to the Effect documentation!

Effect is a powerful TypeScript library designed to help developers
easily create complex, synchronous, and asynchronous programs.

Some of the main Effect features include:

| Feature             | Description                                                                                                        |
| ------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ |
| **Concurrency**     | Achieve highly-scalable, ultra low-latency applications through Effect's fiber-based concurrency model.            |
| **Composability**   | Construct highly maintainable, readable, and flexible software through the use of small, reusable building blocks. |
| **Resource Safety** | Safely manage acquisition and release of resources, even when your program fails.                                  |
| **Type Safety**     | Leverage the TypeScript type system to the fullest with Effect's focus on type inference and type safety.          |
| **Error Handling**  | Handle errors in a structured and reliable manner using Effect's built-in error handling capabilities.             |
| **Asynchronicity**  | Write code that looks the same, whether it is synchronous or asynchronous.                                         |
| **Observability**   | With full tracing capabilities, you can easily debug and monitor the execution of your Effect program.             |

## How to Use These Docs

The documentation is structured in a sequential manner, starting from the basics and progressing to more advanced topics. This allows you to follow along step-by-step as you build your Effect application. However, you have the flexibility to read the documentation in any order or jump directly to the pages that are relevant to your specific use case.

To facilitate navigation within a page, you will find a table of contents on the right side of the screen. This allows you to easily jump between different sections of the page.

## Join our Community

If you have questions about anything related to Effect,
you're always welcome to ask our community on [Discord](https://discord.gg/effect-ts).

Commit message:

add section for LLMs and available documentation files (#1068)

content/src/content/docs/docs/getting-started/introduction.mdx, after:

---
title: Introduction
description: Explore Effect, a TypeScript library for building scalable, maintainable, and type-safe applications with advanced concurrency, error handling, and resource management.
sidebar:
  order: 0
---

Welcome to the Effect documentation!

Effect is a powerful TypeScript library designed to help developers
easily create complex, synchronous, and asynchronous programs.

Some of the main Effect features include:

| Feature             | Description                                                                                                        |
| ------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ |
| **Concurrency**     | Achieve highly-scalable, ultra low-latency applications through Effect's fiber-based concurrency model.            |
| **Composability**   | Construct highly maintainable, readable, and flexible software through the use of small, reusable building blocks. |
| **Resource Safety** | Safely manage acquisition and release of resources, even when your program fails.                                  |
| **Type Safety**     | Leverage the TypeScript type system to the fullest with Effect's focus on type inference and type safety.          |
| **Error Handling**  | Handle errors in a structured and reliable manner using Effect's built-in error handling capabilities.             |
| **Asynchronicity**  | Write code that looks the same, whether it is synchronous or asynchronous.                                         |
| **Observability**   | With full tracing capabilities, you can easily debug and monitor the execution of your Effect program.             |

## How to Use These Docs

The documentation is structured in a sequential manner, starting from the basics and progressing to more advanced topics. This allows you to follow along step-by-step as you build your Effect application. However, you have the flexibility to read the documentation in any order or jump directly to the pages that are relevant to your specific use case.

To facilitate navigation within a page, you will find a table of contents on the right side of the screen. This allows you to easily jump between different sections of the page.

### Docs for LLMs

We support the [llms.txt](https://llmstxt.org/) convention for making documentation available to large language models and the applications that make use of them.

Currently, we have the following root-level files:

- [/llms.txt](https://effect.website/llms.txt) — a listing of the available files
- [/llms-full.txt](https://effect.website/llms-full.txt) — complete documentation for Effect
- [/llms-small.txt](https://effect.website/llms-small.txt) — compressed documentation for use with smaller context windows

## Join our Community

If you have questions about anything related to Effect,
you're always welcome to ask our community on [Discord](https://discord.gg/effect-ts).
